Category: quant-ph
Title: The Convexity Condition of Density-Functional Theory
Authors: Andrew C. Burgess, Edward Linscott, David D. O'Regan
Date: 2023-09-29T17:54:43Z
Abstract:   Based on experimental evidence, it has long been postulated that the total
energy of a finite electronic system is convex with respect to electron count,
so that 2 E_v[N_0] <= E_v[N_0 - 1] + E_v[N_0 + 1]. Using the
infinite-separation-limit technique, this Communication proves the convexity
condition for any formulation of density-functional theory (DFT) that is (1)
exact for all v-representable densities, (2) size-consistent, and (3)
translationally invariant. A corollary to this proof shows that in such
formulations of DFT, the electron affinity of a finite electronic system is
always less than or equal to its ionization potential. An analogous result is
also proven for one-body reduced density matrix functional theory. This proof
offers a stringent constraint on the exact exchange-correlation functional that
could aid in the development of density functional approximations. It also
lifts a standing assumption in the proof of the piecewise linearity condition
with respect to electron count, which has proven central to understanding the
Kohn-Sham band-gap and the exchange-correlation derivative discontinuity of
DFT.


Category: hep-th
Title: Physics with non-unital algebras? An invitation to the Okubo algebra
Authors: Alessio Marrani, Daniele Corradetti, Francesco Zucconi
Date: 2023-09-29T17:47:49Z
Abstract:   This paper discusses the potential application of the Okubonions, i.e. the
Okubo algebra $\mathcal{O}$, within quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The Okubo
algebra lacks a unit element and sits in the adjoint representation of its
automorphism group $\text{SU}(3)_{\mathcal{O}}$, being fundamentally different
from the better-known octonions $\mathbb{O}$. A physical interpretation is
proposed in which the Okubonions represent gluons, the gauge bosons of QCD
$\text{SU}(3)$ color symmetry, while the octonions represent quarks (and color
singlets). However, it is shown that the respective $\text{SU}(3)$ symmetries
for Okubonions and octonions are distinct and inequivalent subgroups of
$\text{Spin}(8)$ that share no common $\text{SU}(2)$ subgroup. The unusual
properties of Okubonions are suggested as a possible source for peculiar QCD
phenomena like asymptotic freedom and color confinement, though actual
mechanisms remain to be investigated.


Category: hep-th
Title: Spinning waveforms from KMOC at leading order
Authors: Stefano De Angelis, Riccardo Gonzo, Pavel P. Novichkov
Date: 2023-09-29T17:41:24Z
Abstract:   We provide the analytic waveform in time domain for the scattering of two
Kerr black holes at leading order in the post-Minkowskian expansion and up to
fourth order in both spins. The result is obtained by the generalization of the
KMOC formalism to radiative observables, combined with the analytic
continuation of the five-point scattering amplitude to complex kinematics. We
use analyticity arguments to express the waveform directly in terms of the
three-point coupling of the graviton to the spinning particles and the
gravitational Compton amplitudes, completely bypassing the need to compute and
integrate the five-point amplitude. In particular, this allows to easily
include higher-order spin contributions for any spinning compact body. Finally,
in the spinless case we find a new compact and gauge-invariant representation
of the Kovacs-Thorne waveform.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Momentum-space imaging of ultra-thin electron liquids in delta-doped
  silicon
Authors: Procopios Constantinou, Taylor J. Z. Stock, Eleanor Crane, Alexander Kölker, Marcel van Loon, Juerong Li, Sarah Fearn, Henric Bornemann, Nicolò D'Anna, Andrew J. Fisher, Vladimir N. Strocov, Gabriel Aeppli, Neil J. Curson, Steven R. Schofield
Date: 2023-09-29T17:18:57Z
Abstract:   Two-dimensional dopant layers ($\delta$-layers) in semiconductors provide the
high-mobility electron liquids (2DELs) needed for nanoscale quantum-electronic
devices. Key parameters such as carrier densities, effective masses, and
confinement thicknesses for 2DELs have traditionally been extracted from
quantum magnetotransport. In principle, the parameters are immediately readable
from the one-electron spectral function that can be measured by angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Here, buried 2DEL $\delta$-layers in
silicon are measured with soft X-ray (SX) ARPES to obtain detailed information
about their filled conduction bands and extract device-relevant properties.
This study takes advantage of the larger probing depth and photon energy range
of SX-ARPES relative to vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) ARPES to accurately measure
the $\delta$-layer electronic confinement. The measurements are made on
ambient-exposed samples and yield extremely thin ($\approx 1$ $nm$) and dense
($\approx$ $10^{14}$ $cm^2$) 2DELs. Critically, this method is used to show
that $\delta$-layers of arsenic exhibit better electronic confinement than
$\delta$-layers of phosphorus fabricated under identical conditions.


Category: hep-th
Title: Thermodynamics with conformal Killing vector in the charged Vaidya
  metric
Authors: Seoktae Koh, Miok Park, Abbas M. Sherif
Date: 2023-09-29T17:00:13Z
Abstract:   We investigate the charged Vaidya spacetime with conformal symmetry by
classifying the horizons and finding its connection to Hawking temperature. We
find a conformal Killing vector whose existence requires the mass and electric
charge functions to be proportional, as well as linear in time. Solving the
Killing equations for the conformally transformed metric from the linear
charged Vaidya metric yields the required form of the conformal factor. From
the vanishing of the norm of the conformal Killing vector, we find three
conformal Killing horizons which, under the transformation, are mapped to the
Killing horizons of the associated static spacetime, if the spherical symmetry
is maintained. We find that the conformal factor is not uniquely determined,
but can take any function of the ratio of the radial coordinate to the
dynamical mass. As an example, we illustrate a static spacetime with our choice
of the conformal factor and explicitly show that the surface gravity of the
conformal Killing horizons, which is conformally invariant, yield the expected
Hawking temperature in the static spacetime. This static black hole spacetime
contains a cosmological horizon, but it is not asymptotically de Sitter. We
also investigate the case when the mass parameter is equal to the constant
electric charge. While in this case the standard pair of horizons, the loci of
the time component of the metric, degenerate, the conformal Killing horizons do
not degenerate. This therefore leads to a non-zero Hawking temperature in the
associated static spacetime.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Topological interfaces crossed by defects and textures of continuous and
  discrete point group symmetries in spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: Giuseppe Baio, Matthew T. Wheeler, David S. Hall, Janne Ruostekoski, Magnus O. Borgh
Date: 2023-09-29T16:56:41Z
Abstract:   We systematically and analytically construct a set of spinor wave functions
representing defects and textures that continuously penetrate interfaces
between coexisting, topologically distinct magnetic phases in a spin-2
Bose-Einstein condensate. These include singular and nonsingular vortices
carrying mass or spin circulation that connect across interfaces between
biaxial- and uniaxial nematic, cyclic and ferromagnetic phases, as well as
vortices terminating as monopoles on the interface ("boojums"). The
biaxial-nematic and cyclic phases exhibit discrete polytope symmetries
featuring non-Abelian vortices and we investigate a pair of non-commuting line
defects within the context of a topological interface. By numerical
simulations, we characterize the emergence of non-trivial defect core
structures, including the formation of composite defects. Our results
demonstrate the potential of spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates as experimentally
accessible platforms for exploring interface physics, offering a wealth of
combinations of continuous and discrete symmetries.


Category: hep-th
Title: Topological interfaces crossed by defects and textures of continuous and
  discrete point group symmetries in spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: Giuseppe Baio, Matthew T. Wheeler, David S. Hall, Janne Ruostekoski, Magnus O. Borgh
Date: 2023-09-29T16:56:41Z
Abstract:   We systematically and analytically construct a set of spinor wave functions
representing defects and textures that continuously penetrate interfaces
between coexisting, topologically distinct magnetic phases in a spin-2
Bose-Einstein condensate. These include singular and nonsingular vortices
carrying mass or spin circulation that connect across interfaces between
biaxial- and uniaxial nematic, cyclic and ferromagnetic phases, as well as
vortices terminating as monopoles on the interface ("boojums"). The
biaxial-nematic and cyclic phases exhibit discrete polytope symmetries
featuring non-Abelian vortices and we investigate a pair of non-commuting line
defects within the context of a topological interface. By numerical
simulations, we characterize the emergence of non-trivial defect core
structures, including the formation of composite defects. Our results
demonstrate the potential of spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates as experimentally
accessible platforms for exploring interface physics, offering a wealth of
combinations of continuous and discrete symmetries.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Singular value decomposition quantum algorithm for quantum biology
Authors: Emily K. Oh, Timothy J. Krogmeier, Anthony W. Schlimgen, Kade Head-Marsden
Date: 2023-09-29T16:52:10Z
Abstract:   There has been a recent interest in quantum algorithms for the modelling and
prediction of non-unitary quantum dynamics using current quantum computers. The
field of quantum biology is one area where these algorithms could prove to be
useful, as biological systems are generally intractable to treat in their
complete form, but amenable to an open quantum systems approach. Here we
present the application of a recently developed singular value decomposition
algorithm to two well-studied benchmark systems in quantum biology: excitonic
energy transport through the Fenna-Matthews-Olson complex and the radical pair
mechanism for avian navigation. We demonstrate that the singular value
decomposition algorithm is capable of capturing accurate short- and long-time
dynamics for these systems through implementation on a quantum simulator, and
conclude that this algorithm has the potential to be an effective tool for the
future study of systems relevant to quantum biology.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Superposition, Collapse of Wave Function, Quantum Measurement
  and Nonadiabatic Dressed States
Authors: I. G. Koprinkov
Date: 2023-09-29T16:27:50Z
Abstract:   Quantum superposition, collapse of wave function and quantum measurement
problem are reexamined based on nonadiabatic dressed states and experimental
observations on the quantum transitions. The physical mechanisms behind these
processes are revealed.


Category: hep-th
Title: Introduction to noncommutative field and gauge theory
Authors: Patrizia Vitale, Martina Adamo, Roukaya Dekhil, Diego Fernández-Silvestre
Date: 2023-09-29T16:17:50Z
Abstract:   These are lecture notes for an introductory course on noncommutative field
and gauge theory. We begin by reviewing quantum mechanics as the prototypical
noncommutative theory, as well as the geometrical language of standard gauge
theory. Then, we review a specific approach to noncommutative field and gauge
theory, which relies on the introduction of a derivations-based differential
calculus. We focus on the cases of constant and linear noncommutativity, e.g.,
the Moyal spacetime and the so-called $\mathbb{R}^3_\lambda$, respectively. In
particular, we review the $g\varphi^4$ scalar field theory and the $U(1)$ gauge
theory on such noncommutative spaces. Finally, we discuss noncommutative
spacetime symmetries from both the observer and particle point of view. In this
context, the twist approach is reviewed and the $\lambda$-Minkowski
$g\varphi^4$ model is discussed.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Machine Learning for Practical Quantum Error Mitigation
Authors: Haoran Liao, Derek S. Wang, Iskandar Sitdikov, Ciro Salcedo, Alireza Seif, Zlatko K. Minev
Date: 2023-09-29T16:17:12Z
Abstract:   Quantum computers are actively competing to surpass classical supercomputers,
but quantum errors remain their chief obstacle. The key to overcoming these on
near-term devices has emerged through the field of quantum error mitigation,
enabling improved accuracy at the cost of additional runtime. In practice,
however, the success of mitigation is limited by a generally exponential
overhead. Can classical machine learning address this challenge on today's
quantum computers? Here, through both simulations and experiments on
state-of-the-art quantum computers using up to 100 qubits, we demonstrate that
machine learning for quantum error mitigation (ML-QEM) can drastically reduce
overheads, maintain or even surpass the accuracy of conventional methods, and
yield near noise-free results for quantum algorithms. We benchmark a variety of
machine learning models -- linear regression, random forests, multi-layer
perceptrons, and graph neural networks -- on diverse classes of quantum
circuits, over increasingly complex device-noise profiles, under interpolation
and extrapolation, and for small and large quantum circuits. These tests employ
the popular digital zero-noise extrapolation method as an added reference. We
further show how to scale ML-QEM to classically intractable quantum circuits by
mimicking the results of traditional mitigation results, while significantly
reducing overhead. Our results highlight the potential of classical machine
learning for practical quantum computation.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Emergence of pairing glue in repulsive Fermi gases with soft-core
  interactions
Authors: Ahmet Keles, Xiaopeng Li, Erhai Zhao
Date: 2023-09-29T16:08:45Z
Abstract:   Recent quantum gas experiments are ushering in an era of fine-tailored
two-body interactions. These include for example atoms with long-range
dipole-dipole interactions and Rydberg-dressed atoms created by optical
coupling to highly excited electronic states. These systems differ from the
``canonical system" of cold atoms with contact interactions characterized by a
single parameter, the scattering length. Inspired by these experiments with
controllable atomic interactions, here we consider a model many-body system of
spinless Fermi gas in two dimensions, where the bare two-body interaction takes
the form of a soft-core disk potential. We show that the repulsive interaction
can drive the system to a series of nontrivial superfluid states with higher
partial wave paring, for example in the $f$- and $h$-wave channels instead of
the $p$-wave channel. The zero temperature phase diagram is obtained by
numerical functional renormalization group (FRG), which goes beyond leading
order perturbation theory and retains the interaction vertices in all channels.
We also carry out a perturbative analysis which is justified in the dilute
limit and show that the second order Kohn-Luttinger diagrams provide a
qualitative understanding of the onsets of the various superfluid phases. The
perturbative arguments however fail to capture the quantitative phase
boundaries predicted by FRG. Our findings illustrate that the shape of the bare
atomic interaction matters in producing the pairing glue in repulsive Fermi
gases, and tuning the interaction potential offers a promising route to realize
exotic many-body phases in cold atomic gases.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Qubit Gate Operations in Elliptically Trapped Polariton Condensates
Authors: Luciano S. Ricco, Ivan A. Shelykh, Alexey Kavokin
Date: 2023-09-29T16:04:47Z
Abstract:   We consider bosonic condensates of exciton-polaritons optically confined in
elliptical traps. A superposition of two non-degenerated \textit{p}-type states
of the condensate oriented along the two main axes of the trap is represented
by a point on a Bloch sphere, being considered as an optically tunable qubit.
We describe a set of universal single-qubit gates resulting in a controllable
shift of the Bloch vector by means of an auxiliary laser beam. Moreover, we
consider interaction mechanisms between two neighboring traps that enable
designing two-qubit operations such as CPHASE, \textit{i}SWAP, and CNOT gates.
Both the single- and two-qubit gates are analyzed in the presence of error
sources in the context of polariton traps, such as pure dephasing and
spontaneous relaxation mechanisms, leading to a fidelity reduction of the final
qubit states and quantum concurrence, as well as the increase of Von Neumann
entropy. We also discuss the applicability of our qubit proposal in the context
of DiVincenzo's criteria for the realization of local quantum computing
processes. Altogether, the developed set of quantum operations would pave the
way to the realization of a variety of quantum algorithms in a planar
microcavity with a set of optically induced elliptical traps.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Evanescent Electron Wave Spin
Authors: Ju Gao, Fang Shen
Date: 2023-09-29T15:32:37Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate that an evanescent wave spin exists outside a finite quantum
well by solving the Dirac equation in a finite cylindrical quantum well. The
analytical analysis validates the wavefunction inside an infinite quantum well
but recovers a non-zero evanescent wave outside the well. We propose that it is
possible to probe or eavesdrop on quantum spin information through the
evanescent wave spin without destroying the entire spin state. We argue that a
spin-based quantum process or device is deterministic rather than
probabilistic.


Category: hep-th
Title: Hilbert Schemes of Points in the Plane and Quasi-Lisse Vertex Algebras
  with $\mathcal{N}=4$ Symmetry
Authors: Tomoyuki Arakawa, Toshiro Kuwabara, Sven Möller
Date: 2023-09-29T15:05:58Z
Abstract:   To each complex reflection group $\Gamma$ one can attach a canonical
symplectic singularity $\mathcal{M}_\Gamma$ arXiv:math/9903070. Motivated by
the 4D/2D duality arXiv:1312.5344, arXiv:1707.07679, Bonetti, Meneghelli and
Rastelli arXiv:1810.03612 conjectured the existence of a supersymmetric vertex
operator superalgebra $\mathsf{W}_\Gamma$ whose associated variety is
isomorphic to $\mathcal{M}_\Gamma$. We prove this conjecture when the complex
reflection group $\Gamma$ is the symmetric group $S_N$ by constructing a sheaf
of $\hbar$-adic vertex operator superalgebras on the Hilbert scheme of $N$
points in the plane. For that case, we also show the free-field realisation of
$\mathsf{W}_\Gamma$ in terms of $\operatorname{rk}(\Gamma)$ many $\beta\gamma
bc$-systems proposed in arXiv:1810.03612, and identify the character of
$\mathsf{W}_\Gamma$ as a certain quasimodular form of mixed weight.
  In physical terms, the vertex operator superalgebra $\mathsf{W}_{S_N}$
constructed in this article corresponds via the 4D/2D duality arXiv:1312.5344
to the four-dimensional $\mathcal{N}=4$ supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory with
gauge group $\operatorname{SL}_N$.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Source-Replacement Model for Phase-Matching Quantum Key Distribution
Authors: Yizhi Huang, Zhenyu Du, Xiongfeng Ma
Date: 2023-09-29T15:00:10Z
Abstract:   Quantum key distribution has emerged as a promising solution for constructing
secure communication networks, offering information-theoretic security
guaranteed by the principles of quantum mechanics. One of the most advanced
quantum key distribution protocols to date is the phase-matching protocol. Its
security was initially established using an abstract method known as
symmetry-protected privacy. In this study, we reevaluate the security of the
phase-matching protocol using an intuitive source-replacement model, and we
arrive at conclusions that align with the original proof. This model provides a
fresh perspective on the protocol's security. As an application of this
approach, we introduce a beam-splitting attack scheme. Leveraging the
source-replacement model, we derive a lower bound on the phase error rate under
this attack, further underscoring the robustness of our security analysis
method.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Amplitude Estimation for Probabilistic Methods in Power Systems
Authors: Emilie Jong, Brynjar Sævarsson, Hjörtur Jóhannsson, Spyros Chatzivasileiadis
Date: 2023-09-29T14:56:29Z
Abstract:   This paper introduces quantum computing methods for Monte Carlo simulations
in power systems which are expected to be exponentially faster than their
classical computing counterparts. Monte Carlo simulations is a fundamental
method, widely used in power systems to estimate key parameters of unknown
probability distributions, such as the mean value, the standard deviation, or
the value at risk. It is, however, very computationally intensive. Approaches
based on Quantum Amplitude Estimation can offer a quadratic speedup, requiring
orders of magnitude less samples to achieve the same accuracy. This paper
explains three Quantum Amplitude Estimation methods to replace the Classical
Monte Carlo method, namely the Iterative Quantum Amplitude Estimation (IQAE),
Maximum Likelihood Amplitude Estimation (MLAE), and Faster Amplitude Estimation
(FAE), and compares their performance for three different types of probability
distributions for power systems.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Privacy-preserving Two-party Circle Intersection Protocol Based
  on Phase-encoded Query
Authors: Zi-Xian Li, Qi Yang, Bao Feng, Wen-Jie Liu
Date: 2023-09-29T14:49:15Z
Abstract:   Privacy-preserving geometric intersection (PGI) is an important issue in
Secure multiparty computation (SMC). The existing quantum PGI protocols are
mainly based on grid coding, which requires a lot of computational complexity.
The phase-encoded query method which has been used in some Quantum SMC
protocols is suitable to solve the decision problem, but it needs to apply high
dimensional Oracle operators. In this paper, we use the principle of
phase-encoded query to solve an important PGI problem, namely
privacy-preserving two-party circle intersection. We study the implementation
of Oracle operator in detail, and achieve polynomial computational complexity
by decompsing it into quantum arithmetic operations. Performance analysis shows
that our protocol is correct and efficient, and can protect the privacy of all
participants against internal and external attacks.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Flux-pulse-assisted Readout of a Fluxonium Qubit
Authors: Taryn V. Stefanski, Christian Kraglund Andersen
Date: 2023-09-29T14:43:43Z
Abstract:   Much attention has focused on the transmon architecture for large-scale
superconducting quantum devices, however, the fluxonium qubit has emerged as a
possible successor. With a shunting inductor in parallel to a Josephson
junction, the fluxonium offers larger anharmonicity and stronger protection
against dielectric loss, leading to higher coherence times as compared to
conventional transmon qubits. The interplay between the inductive and Josephson
energy potentials of the fluxonium qubit leads to a rich dispersive shift
landscape when tuning the external flux. Here we propose to exploit the
features in the dispersive shift to improve qubit readout. Specifically, we
report on theoretical simulations showing improved readout times and error
rates by performing the readout at a flux bias point with large dispersive
shift. We expand the scheme to include different error channels, and show that
flux-pulse-assisted readout offers 5 times improvement in signal to noise ratio
after 200 ns integration time. Moreover, we show that the performance
improvement persists in the presence of finite measurement efficiency combined
with quasi-static flux noise. We suggest energy parameters for the fluxonium
architecture that will allow for the implementation of our proposed
flux-pulse-assisted readout scheme.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Characterizing losses in InAs two-dimensional electron gas-based gatemon
  qubits
Authors: William M. Strickland, Jaewoo Lee, Lukas Baker, Krishna Dindial, Bassel Heiba Elfeky, Mehdi Hatefipour, Peng Yu, Ido Levy, Vladimir E. Manucharyan, Javad Shabani
Date: 2023-09-29T14:23:28Z
Abstract:   The tunnelling of cooper pairs across a Josephson junction (JJ) allow for the
nonlinear inductance necessary to construct superconducting qubits, amplifiers,
and various other quantum circuits. An alternative approach using hybrid
superconductor-semiconductor JJs can enable a superconducting qubit
architecture with full electric field control. Here we present continuous-wave
and time-domain characterization of gatemon qubits based on an InAs 2DEG. We
show that the qubit undergoes a vacuum Rabi splitting with a readout cavity and
we drive coherent Rabi oscillations between the qubit ground and first excited
states. We measure qubit coherence times to be $T_1 =$ 100 ns over a 1.5 GHz
tunable band. While various loss mechanisms are present in III-V gatemon
circuits we detail future directions in enhancing the coherence times of qubit
devices on this platform.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Advantage of Qubit Communication Over The C-bit in Multiple Access
  Channel
Authors: Ananya Chakraborty, Sahil Gopalkrishna Naik, Edwin Peter Lobo, Ram Krishna Patra, Samrat Sen, Mir Alimuddin, Amit Mukherjee, Manik Banik
Date: 2023-09-29T14:15:35Z
Abstract:   The celebrated no-go theorem by Holevo limits the information capacity of an
individual quantum system when no entanglement is shared between the sender and
receiver. A recently extended version of this theorem by Frenkel \& Weiner
imposes even a stricter embargo on communication utilities of a quantum system.
Specifically, in point-to-point information transmission scenario, it proves
that any input-output correlation achievable with an n-level quantum system can
also be achieved with an n-state classical object provided the communication
lines are assisted with classical correlations only. In this work, we show that
such a no-go result does not hold true in network communication scenario
involving multiple access channel (MAC), where several independent senders aim
to transmit messages to a single receiver. We present various instances of MAC
simulation tasks wherein communicating quantum systems prove to be advantageous
over their classical counterparts, even when classical channels are augmented
with unlimited shared randomness across different configurations. We also
identify the foundational linchpins underlying the quantum advantages, which
paves the way for several other quantum benefits in network communication
scenarios.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Asymmetric cloning in quantum information theory
Authors: Denis Rochette
Date: 2023-09-29T13:27:45Z
Abstract:   This thesis investigates quantum cloning and related quantum entanglement
problems using core concepts of representation theory, in particular those
associated with the symmetric group. The research explores Schur-Weyl duality
and its extensions, which allow efficient representation and manipulation of
quantum systems, serving as a valuable tool for quantum information theory. A
primary application of Schur-Weyl duality is the quantum cloning problem, which
is studied for both the $1 \to 2$ and the more general $1 \to N$ cases,
providing new insights into the constraints imposed by the no-cloning theorem.
The investigation extends to a more general quantum entanglement problem on a
complete graph.


Category: hep-th
Title: Entanglement entropy along a massless renormalisation flow: the
  tricritical to critical Ising crossover
Authors: Federico Rottoli, Filiberto Ares, Pasquale Calabrese, Dávid X. Horváth
Date: 2023-09-29T12:46:01Z
Abstract:   We study the R\'enyi entanglement entropies along the massless
renormalisation group flow that connects the tricritical and critical Ising
field theories. Similarly to the massive integrable field theories, we derive a
set of bootstrap equations, from which we can analytically calculate the twist
field form factors in a recursive way. Additionally, we also obtain them as a
non-trivial roaming limit of the sinh-Gordon theory. Then the R\'enyi
entanglement entropies are obtained as expansions in terms of the form factors
of these branch point twist fields. We find that the form factor expansion of
the entanglement entropy along the flow organises in two different kind of
terms. Those that couple particles with the same chirality, and reproduce the
entropy of the infrared Ising theory, and those that couple particles with
different chirality, which provide the ultraviolet contributions. The massless
flow under study possesses a global $\mathbb{Z}_2$ spin-flip symmetry. We
further consider the composite twist fields associated to this group, which
enter in the study of the symmetry resolution of the entanglement. We derive
analytical expressions for their form factors both from the bootstrap equations
and from the roaming limit of the sinh-Gordon theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Charge-parity switching effects and optimisation of transmon-qubit
  design parameters
Authors: Miha Papič, Jani Tuorila, Adrian Auer, Inés de Vega, Amin Hosseinkhani
Date: 2023-09-29T12:05:27Z
Abstract:   Enhancing the performance of noisy quantum processors requires improving our
understanding of error mechanisms and the ways to overcome them. A judicious
selection of qubit design parameters, guided by an accurate error model, plays
a pivotal role in improving the performance of quantum processors. In this
study, we identify optimal ranges for qubit design parameters, grounded in
comprehensive noise modeling. To this end, we commence by analyzing a
previously unexplored error mechanism that can perturb diabatic two-qubit gates
due to charge-parity switches caused by quasiparticles. We show that such
charge-parity switching can be the dominant quasiparticle-related error source
in a controlled-Z gate between two qubits. Moreover, we also demonstrate that
quasiparticle dynamics, resulting in uncontrolled charge-parity switches,
induce a residual longitudinal interaction between qubits in a tunable-coupler
circuit. Our analysis of optimal design parameters is based on a performance
metric for quantum circuit execution that takes into account the fidelity and
frequencies of the appearance of both single and two-qubit gates in the
circuit. This performance metric together with a detailed noise model enables
us to find an optimal range for the qubit design parameters. Substantiating our
findings through exact numerical simulations, we establish that fabricating
quantum chips within this optimal parameter range not only augments the
performance metric but also ensures its continued improvement with the
enhancement of individual qubit coherence properties. Conversely, straying from
the optimal parameter range can lead to the saturation of the performance
metric. Our systematic analysis offers insights and serves as a guiding
framework for the development of the next generation of transmon-based quantum
processors.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Immersed figure-8 annuli and a strong isomorphism conjecture
Authors: Bowen Shi
Date: 2023-09-29T11:43:48Z
Abstract:   Immersion (i.e., local embedding) is relevant to the physics of topologically
ordered phases through entanglement bootstrap. An annulus can immerse in a disk
or a sphere as a ``figure-8", which cannot be smoothly deformed to an embedded
annulus. We investigate a simple problem: is there an Abelian state on the
figure-8 annulus? We show that if the answer is affirmative, a strong sense of
isomorphism must hold: two homeomorphic immersed regions must have isomorphic
information convex sets, even if they cannot smoothly deform to each other on
the background physical system. We explain why to care about strong isomorphism
and give proof in the context of Abelian anyon theory. We further discuss a
connection between immersed annuli and anyon transportation in the presence of
topological defects. In appendices, we discuss related problems in broader
contexts.


Category: hep-th
Title: Immersed figure-8 annuli and a strong isomorphism conjecture
Authors: Bowen Shi
Date: 2023-09-29T11:43:48Z
Abstract:   Immersion (i.e., local embedding) is relevant to the physics of topologically
ordered phases through entanglement bootstrap. An annulus can immerse in a disk
or a sphere as a ``figure-8", which cannot be smoothly deformed to an embedded
annulus. We investigate a simple problem: is there an Abelian state on the
figure-8 annulus? We show that if the answer is affirmative, a strong sense of
isomorphism must hold: two homeomorphic immersed regions must have isomorphic
information convex sets, even if they cannot smoothly deform to each other on
the background physical system. We explain why to care about strong isomorphism
and give proof in the context of Abelian anyon theory. We further discuss a
connection between immersed annuli and anyon transportation in the presence of
topological defects. In appendices, we discuss related problems in broader
contexts.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Speckled-speckle field as a resource for imaging techniques
Authors: Silvia Cassina, Gabriele Cenedese, Alessia Allevi, Maria Bondani
Date: 2023-09-29T11:04:03Z
Abstract:   Correlated states of light, both classical and quantum, can find useful
applications in the implementation of several imaging techniques, such as ghost
imaging and differential ghost imaging. Among the classically-correlated
states, pseudo-thermal states, generated by passing a laser beam through a
diffuser, represent the standard choice. To produce light states with a higher
level of correlation, a sequence of two or more diffusers can be used. In this
work we describe and characterize the super-thermal states obtained with two
diffusers using both a numerical simulation and an experimental implementation.
In order to quantify the possible advantages in imaging protocols of
super-thermal light over pseudo-thermal one, we analyze the behavior of some
figures of merit, namely contrast and signal-to-noise ratio, as functions of
the size of a binary object to be imaged and the number of images required by
the protocol. The obtained results are a promising step towards the
exploitation of super-thermal light as a valid alternative to pseudo-thermal
one.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gravitational Waves and Gravitino Mass in No-Scale Supergravity
  Inflation with Polonyi Term
Authors: Miguel Crispim Romão, Stephen F. King
Date: 2023-09-29T10:50:09Z
Abstract:   We study a No-Scale supergravity inflation model which has a non-minimal
deformation of the K\"ahler potential and a Wess-Zumino superpotential extended
by the inclusion of a Polonyi mass term. The non-minimal structure of the
K\"ahler potential is responsible for an inflexion point that can lead to the
production of gravitational waves at late stages of inflation, while the
Polonyi term breaks supersymmetry at the end of inflation, generating a
non-vanishing gravitino mass. After a thorough parameter space scan, we
identify promising points for gravitational wave production. We then study the
resulting gravitational wave energy density for this set of points, and we
observe that the gravitational waves should be observable in the next
generation of both space-based and ground-based interferometers. Finally, we
show how the presence of the Polonyi term can be used to further boost the
gravitational wave energy density, which is correlated with the gravitino mass.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Population Oscillations and Ubiquitous Coherences in multilevel quantum
  systems driven by incoherent radiation
Authors: Amro Dodin, Timur V. Tscherbul, Paul Brumer
Date: 2023-09-29T10:42:12Z
Abstract:   We consider incoherent excitation of multilevel quantum systems, e.g.
molecules with multiple vibronic states.
  We show that (1) the geometric constraints of the matter-field coupling
operator guarantee that noise-induced coherences will be generated in all
systems with four or more energy eigenstates and (2) noise-induced coherences
can lead to population oscillations due to quantum interference via coherence
transfer between pairs of states in the ground and excited manifolds. Our
findings facilitate the experimental detection of noise-induced coherent
dynamics in complex quantum systems.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Broken Symmetry and Fractionalized Flux Strings in a Staggered U(1) Pure
  Gauge Theory
Authors: A. Banerjee, D. Banerjee, G. Kanwar, A. Mariani, T. Rindlisbacher, U. -J. Wiese
Date: 2023-09-29T10:08:21Z
Abstract:   Inspired by self-adjoint extensions of the electric field operator in the
Hamiltonian formalism, we extend the Wilsonian framework of Abelian lattice
gauge theory by introducing a modified action parameterized by an angle
$\alpha$, where the ordinary Wilson theory corresponds to $\alpha=0$. Choosing
instead $\alpha=\pi$ (the "staggered" case) gives the only other theory in the
family which preserves all symmetries of the original model at the microscopic
level. We study the case of $3D$ $\mathrm{U}(1)$ pure gauge theory, simulating
the staggered case of this model numerically in its dual formulation. We find
evidence of a continuum limit with a spontaneously broken $\mathbb{Z}_2$
single-site translational symmetry, in contrast to the ordinary theory.
Moreover, the confining string fractionalizes into multiple strands which
separate spatial regions in distinct ground states of the broken symmetry.


Category: hep-th
Title: Broken Symmetry and Fractionalized Flux Strings in a Staggered U(1) Pure
  Gauge Theory
Authors: A. Banerjee, D. Banerjee, G. Kanwar, A. Mariani, T. Rindlisbacher, U. -J. Wiese
Date: 2023-09-29T10:08:21Z
Abstract:   Inspired by self-adjoint extensions of the electric field operator in the
Hamiltonian formalism, we extend the Wilsonian framework of Abelian lattice
gauge theory by introducing a modified action parameterized by an angle
$\alpha$, where the ordinary Wilson theory corresponds to $\alpha=0$. Choosing
instead $\alpha=\pi$ (the "staggered" case) gives the only other theory in the
family which preserves all symmetries of the original model at the microscopic
level. We study the case of $3D$ $\mathrm{U}(1)$ pure gauge theory, simulating
the staggered case of this model numerically in its dual formulation. We find
evidence of a continuum limit with a spontaneously broken $\mathbb{Z}_2$
single-site translational symmetry, in contrast to the ordinary theory.
Moreover, the confining string fractionalizes into multiple strands which
separate spatial regions in distinct ground states of the broken symmetry.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Supersolid formation time shortcut and excitation reduction by
  manipulating the dynamical instability
Authors: Aitor Alaña
Date: 2023-09-29T09:49:28Z
Abstract:   Supersolids are a phase of matter exhibiting both superfluidity and a
periodic density modulation typical of crystals. When formed via quantum phase
transition from a superfluid, they require a formation time before their
density pattern develops. Along this paper some protocols/schemes are proposed
for experimental applications, building on earlier descriptions of the role
roton instability plays in the supersolid formation process and the associated
formation time. In particular, the Parachutejump scheme sought to lessen the
excitation produced when crossing the phase transition, and the Bang-Bang
method sought to shorten the formation time. As a case study of the impact that
mechanical fluctuations (noise) can have on the phase transition when
conducting an experiment, the impact of a mechanical kick before the transition
is also investigated. The proposed schemes are able to fulfill their objectives
successfully as both the shortening of the formation process and the reduction
of excitation are achieved within the framework of extended Gross Pitaevskii
theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Optical fibres with memory effects and their quantum communication
  capacities
Authors: Francesco Anna Mele, Giacomo De Palma, Marco Fanizza, Vittorio Giovannetti, Ludovico Lami
Date: 2023-09-29T08:58:03Z
Abstract:   The development of quantum repeaters poses significant challenges in terms of
cost and maintenance, prompting the exploration of alternative approaches for
achieving long-distance quantum communication. In the absence of quantum
repeaters and under the memoryless (iid) approximation, it has been established
that some fundamental quantum communication tasks are impossible if the
transmissivity of an optical fibre falls below a known critical value,
resulting in a severe constraint on the achievable distance for quantum
communication. However, if the memoryless assumption does not hold -- e.g. when
input signals are separated by a sufficiently short time interval -- the
validity of this limitation is put into question. In this paper we introduce a
model of optical fibre that can describe memory effects for long transmission
lines. We then solve its quantum capacity, two-way quantum capacity, and
secret-key capacity exactly. By doing so, we show that -- due to the memory
cross-talk between the transmitted signals -- reliable quantum communication is
attainable even for highly noisy regimes where it was previously considered
impossible. As part of our solution, we find the critical time interval between
subsequent signals below which quantum communication, two-way entanglement
distribution, and quantum key distribution become achievable.


Category: hep-th
Title: The Operator Rings of Topological Symmetric Orbifolds and their Large N
  Limit
Authors: Sujay K. Ashok, Jan Troost
Date: 2023-09-29T08:25:02Z
Abstract:   We compute the structure constants of topological symmetric orbifold theories
up to third order in the large N expansion. The leading order structure
constants are dominated by topological metric contractions. The first order
interactions are single cycles joining while at second order we can have double
joining as well as splitting. At third order, single cycle joining obtains
genus one contributions. We also compute illustrative small N structure
constants. Our analysis applies to all second quantized Frobenius algebras, a
large class of algebras that includes the cohomology ring of the Hilbert scheme
of points on K3 among many others. We point out interesting open questions that
our results raise.


Category: hep-th
Title: Rotating black hole solutions for $f(R)$ gravity and Newman Janis
  Algorithm
Authors: Pankaj Chaturvedi, Utkarsh Kumar, Udaykrishna Thattarampilly, Vishnu Kakkat
Date: 2023-09-29T08:11:04Z
Abstract:   We show that the $f(R)$-gravity theories with constant Ricci scalar in the
Jordan/Einstein frame can be described by Einstein or Einstein-Maxwell gravity
with a cosmological term and a modified gravitational constant. We also propose
a modified Newmann-Janis algorithm to obtain the rotating axisymmetric
solutions for the Einstein/Einstein-Maxwell gravity with a cosmological
constant. Using the duality between the two gravity theories we show that the
stationary or static solutions for the Einstein/Einstein-Maxwell gravity with a
cosmological constant will also be the solutions for the dual $f(R)$-gravity
with constant Ricci scalar.


Category: hep-th
Title: Effective action and black hole solutions in asymptotically safe quantum
  gravity
Authors: Jan M. Pawlowski, Jan Tränkle
Date: 2023-09-29T08:07:48Z
Abstract:   We derive the quantum effective action and the respective quantum equations
of motion from multi-graviton correlation functions in asymptotically safe
quantum gravity. The fully momentum-dependent couplings of three- and
four-graviton scatterings are computed within the functional renormalisation
group approach and the effective action is reconstructed from these vertices.
The resulting quantum equations of motion are solved numerically for quantum
black hole geometries. Importantly, the black hole solutions show signatures of
quantum gravity outside the classical horizon, which manifest in the behaviour
of the temporal and radial components of the metric. Three different types of
solutions with distinct causal structures are identified and the phase
structure of the solution space is investigated.


Category: hep-th
Title: A new approach to string theory
Authors: Albert Schwarz
Date: 2023-09-29T07:04:13Z
Abstract:   In the present paper we consider quantum theories obtained by quantization of
classical theories with first-class constraints assuming that these constraints
form a Lie algebra. We show that in this case, one can construct physical
quantities of a new type. We apply this construction to string theory. We find
that scattering amplitudes in critical bosonic closed string theory can be
expressed in terms of physical quantities of the new type. Our techniques can
be applied also to superstring and heterotic string.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Tuning excitation transport in a dissipative Rydberg ring
Authors: Yiwen Han, Wei Yi
Date: 2023-09-29T05:03:03Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate the flexible tunability of excitation transport in Rydberg
atoms, under the interplay of controlled dissipation and interaction-induced
synthetic flux. Considering a minimum four-site setup -- a triangular
configuration with an additional output site -- we study the transport of a
single excitation, injected into a vertex of the triangle, through the
structure. While the long-range dipole-dipole interactions between the Rydberg
atoms lead to geometry-dependent Peierls phases in the hopping amplitudes of
excitations, we further introduce on-site dissipation to a vertex of the
triangle. As a result, both the chirality and destination of the transport can
be manipulated through the flux and dissipation. In particular, we illustrate a
parameter regime where our Rydberg-ring structure may serve as a switch for
transporting the injected excitation through to the output site. The underlying
mechanism is then analyzed by studying the chiral trajectory of the excitation
and the time-dependent dissipation.


Category: quant-ph
Title: MEMQSim: Highly Memory-Efficient and Modularized Quantum State-Vector
  Simulation
Authors: Boyuan Zhang, Bo Fang, Qiang Guan, Ang Li, Dingwen Tao
Date: 2023-09-29T04:55:17Z
Abstract:   In this extended abstract, we have introduced a highly memory-efficient state
vector simulation of quantum circuits premised on data compression, harnessing
the capabilities of both CPUs and GPUs. We have elucidated the inherent
challenges in architecting this system, while concurrently proposing our
tailored solutions. Moreover, we have delineated our preliminary implementation
and deliberated upon the potential for integration with other GPU-oriented
simulators. In forthcoming research, we aim to present a more comprehensive set
of results, bolstering the assertion of the efficacy and performance of our
approach.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A Quantum States Preparation Method Based on Difference-Driven
  Reinforcement Learning
Authors: Wenjie Liu, Jing Xu, Bosi Wang
Date: 2023-09-29T04:42:11Z
Abstract:   Due to the large state space of the two-qubit system, and the adoption of
ladder reward function in the existing quantum state preparation methods, the
convergence speed is slow and it is difficult to prepare the desired target
quantum state with high fidelity under limited conditions. To solve the above
problems, a difference-driven reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm for quantum
state preparation of two-qubit system is proposed by improving the reward
function and action selection strategy. Firstly, a model is constructed for the
problem of preparing quantum states of a two-qubit system, with restrictions on
the type of quantum gates and the time for quantum state evolution. In the
preparation process, a weighted differential dynamic reward function is
designed to assist the algorithm quickly obtain the maximum expected cumulative
reward. Then, an adaptive e-greedy action selection strategy is adopted to
achieve a balance between exploration and utilization to a certain extent,
thereby improving the fidelity of the final quantum state. The simulation
results show that the proposed algorithm can prepare quantum state with high
fidelity under limited conditions. Compared with other algorithms, it has
different degrees of improvement in convergence speed and fidelity of the final
quantum state.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Entropic uncertainty relations for multiple measurements assigned with
  biased weights
Authors: Shan Huang, Hua-Lei Yin, Zeng-Bing Chen, Shengjun Wu
Date: 2023-09-29T03:50:46Z
Abstract:   The entropic way of formulating Heisenberg's uncertainty principle not only
plays a fundamental role in applications of quantum information theory but also
is essential for manifesting genuine nonclassical features of quantum systems.
In this paper, we investigate R\'{e}nyi entropic uncertainty relations (EURs)
in the scenario where measurements on individual copies of a quantum system are
selected with non-uniform probabilities. In contrast with EURs that
characterize observer's overall lack of information about outcomes with respect
to a collection of measurements, we establish state-dependent lower bounds on
the weighted sum of entropies over multiple measurements. Conventional EURs
thus correspond to the special cases when all weights are equal, and in such
cases, we show our results are generally stronger than previous ones. Moreover,
taking the entropic steering criterion as an example, we numerically verify
that our EURs could be advantageous in practical quantum tasks by optimizing
the weights assigned to different measurements. Importantly, this optimization
does not require quantum resources and is efficiently computable on classical
computers.


Category: hep-th
Title: Image of Kerr-de Sitter black holes: An additional avenue for testing
  the cosmological constant
Authors: Ke Wang, Chao-Jun Feng, Towe Wang
Date: 2023-09-29T03:02:57Z
Abstract:   To explore the feasibility of utilizing black hole images to test the
cosmological constant, we have developed a comprehensive analytical method for
simulating images of Kerr-de Sitter black holes illuminated by equatorial thin
accretion disks. Our findings indicate that the cosmological constant not only
reduces the apparent size of the black hole but also increases its apparent
brightness. We believe that the photon ring, as a promising observable feature,
presents potential opportunities for investigating the impact of the
cosmological constant on black hole observations.


Category: hep-th
Title: Deformed Double Current Algebras, Matrix Extended $\mathcal W_{\infty}$
  Algebras, Coproducts, and Intertwiners from the M2-M5 Intersection
Authors: Davide Gaiotto, Miroslav Rapčák, Yehao Zhou
Date: 2023-09-29T02:07:17Z
Abstract:   We study the algebraic structures which govern the deformation of
supersymmetric intersections of M2 and M5 branes. The universal algebras on M2
and M5 branes are deformed double current algebra of $\mathfrak{gl}_K$ and
$\mathfrak{gl}_K$-extended $\mathcal{W}_{\infty}$-algebra respectively. We give
a new presentation of the deformed double current algebra of $\mathfrak{gl}_K$,
and we give a rigorous mathematical construction of the
$\mathfrak{gl}_K$-extended $\mathcal{W}_{\infty}$-algebra. A new presentation
of the affine Yangian of $\mathfrak{gl}_K$ is also obtained. We construct
various coproducts of these algebras, which are expected to encode the fusions
of defects in twisted M-theory. The matrix extended Miura operators are
identified as intertwiners in certain bimodules of these algebras.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Nonlocality via multiqubit orthogonal product bases
Authors: Lin Chen, Yutong Jiang
Date: 2023-09-29T00:25:04Z
Abstract:   We investigate the quantum nonlocality via the discrimination on two, three
and four-qubit orthogonal product bases (OPBs). We show that every two-qubit,
and some three and four-qubit OPBs can be locally distinguished. It turns out
that the remaining three and four-qubit OPBs cannot be locally distinguished,
and thus they show the quantum nonlocality without entanglement. We also
distinguish them by merging some systems using quantum teleportation with
assisted Bell states.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Symmetry breaking bifurcations and excitations of solitons in linearly
  coupled NLS equations with PT-symmetric potentials
Authors: Jin Song, Boris A. Malomed, Zhenya Yan
Date: 2023-09-29T00:10:25Z
Abstract:   We address symmetry breaking bifurcations (SBBs) in the ground-state (GS) and
dipole-mode (DM) solitons of the 1D linearly coupled NLS equations, modeling
the propagation of light in a dual-core planar waveguide with the Kerr
nonlinearity and two types of PT-symmetric potentials. The PT-symmetric
potential is employed to obtained different types of solutions. A supercritical
pitchfork bifurcation occurs in families of symmetric solutions of both the GS
and DM types. A novel feature of the system is interplay between breakings of
the PT and inter-core symmetries. Stability of symmetric GS and DM modes and
their asymmetric counterparts, produced by SBBs of both types, is explored via
the linear-stability analysis and simulations. It is found that the instability
of PT-symmetric solutions takes place prior to the inter-core symmetry
breaking. Surprisingly, stable inter-core-symmetric GS solutions may remain
stable while the PT symmetry is broken. Fully asymmetric GS and DM solitons are
only partially stable. Moreover, we construct symmetric and asymmetric GS
solitons under the action of a pure imaginary localized potential, for which
the SBB is subcritical. These results exhibit that stable solitons can still be
found in dissipative systems. Finally, excitations of symmetric and asymmetric
GS solitons are investigated by making the potential's parameters or the
system's coupling constant functions, showing that GS solitons can be converted
from an asymmetric shape onto a symmetric one under certain conditions. These
results may pave the way for the study of linear and nonlinear phenomena in a
dual-core planar waveguide with PT potential and related experimental designs.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Magnetically Induced Schrödinger Cat States: The Shadow of a Quantum
  Space
Authors: Partha Nandi, Nandita Debnath, Subhajit Kala, A. S. Majumdar
Date: 2023-09-28T23:44:19Z
Abstract:   Schr\"odinger cat states, which are superpositions of macroscopically
distinct states, are potentially critical resources for upcoming quantum
information technologies. In this paper, we introduce a scheme to generate
entangled Schr\"odinger cat states in a non-relativistic electric dipole system
situated on a two-dimensional plane, along with an external potential and a
uniform strong magnetic field perpendicular to the plane. Additionally, our
findings demonstrate that this setup can lead to the phenomenon of collapse and
revival of entanglement for a specific range of our model parameters


Category: hep-th
Title: Magnetically Induced Schrödinger Cat States: The Shadow of a Quantum
  Space
Authors: Partha Nandi, Nandita Debnath, Subhajit Kala, A. S. Majumdar
Date: 2023-09-28T23:44:19Z
Abstract:   Schr\"odinger cat states, which are superpositions of macroscopically
distinct states, are potentially critical resources for upcoming quantum
information technologies. In this paper, we introduce a scheme to generate
entangled Schr\"odinger cat states in a non-relativistic electric dipole system
situated on a two-dimensional plane, along with an external potential and a
uniform strong magnetic field perpendicular to the plane. Additionally, our
findings demonstrate that this setup can lead to the phenomenon of collapse and
revival of entanglement for a specific range of our model parameters


Category: quant-ph
Title: A 64-pixel mid-infrared single-photon imager based on superconducting
  nanowire detectors
Authors: Benedikt Hampel, Richard P. Mirin, Sae Woo Nam, Varun B. Verma
Date: 2023-09-28T23:12:27Z
Abstract:   A large-format mid-infrared single-photon imager with very low dark count
rates would enable a broad range of applications in fields like astronomy and
chemistry. Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) are a
mature photon-counting technology as demonstrated by their figures of merit.
However, scaling SNSPDs to large array sizes for mid-infrared applications
requires sophisticated readout architectures in addition to superconducting
materials development. In this work, an SNSPD array design that combines a
thermally coupled row-column multiplexing architecture with a thermally coupled
time-of-flight transmission line was developed for mid-infrared applications.
The design requires only six cables and can be scaled to larger array sizes.
The demonstration of a 64-pixel array shows promising results for wavelengths
between $\mathrm{3.4\,\mu m}$ and $\mathrm{10\,\mu m}$, which will enable the
use of this single-photon detector technology for a broad range of new
applications.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Two-body Coulomb problem and hidden $g^{(2)}$ algebra:
  superintegrability and cubic polynomial algebra
Authors: Alexander V. Turbiner, Adrian M. Escobar-Ruiz
Date: 2023-09-28T22:47:18Z
Abstract:   It is shown that the two-body Coulomb problem in the Sturm representation
leads to a new two-dimensional, exactly-solvable, superintegrable quantum
system in curved space with a $g^{(2)}$ hidden algebra and a cubic polynomial
algebra of integrals. The two integrals are of orders two and four, they are
made from two components of the angular momentum and from the modified
Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector, respectively. It is demonstrated that the cubic
polynomial algebra is an infinite-dimensional subalgebra of the universal
enveloping algebra $U_{g^{(2)}}$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Nonminimal planar electrodynamics modified by higher-derivative terms
Authors: Letícia Lisboa-Santos, João A. A. S. Reis, Marco Schreck, Manoel M. Ferreira
Date: 2023-09-28T20:40:47Z
Abstract:   We consider a (2+1)-dimensional modified electrodynamics endowed with terms
that are either Lorentz-invariant or Lorentz-violating and involve an ever
increasing number of derivatives. Our construction relies on U(1) gauge
invariance and the Abelian Chern-Simons term poses the starting point. The
structure of the nonminimal Standard-Model Extension (SME) in (3+1) spacetime
dimensions serves as an inspiration for our pursuit. For elaborate studies and
applications we particularly focus on the second term of the operator series in
the general framework, which is the first contribution with additional
derivatives. The latter forms the essential ingredient for several models of
modified planar electrodynamics to be examined. The propagators of the models
constitute the foundation for us deriving the physical propagating modes as
well as for drawing conclusions on unitarity in the quantum regime. We are also
interested in identifying parameter regions of sub- and superluminal mode
propagation and determine classical solutions of the field equations for the
planar models introduced. Moreover, a duality between an extended Chern-Simons
theory and a subset of the fermion sector coefficients in the nonminimal SME is
pointed out, as well. Finally, the integer quantum Hall effect is chosen as a
testbed to demonstrate the applicability of our findings to real physical
systems. Predictions on momentum- and direction-dependent corrections of the
Hall resistivity are made at the level of effective field theory, which could
be tested in experiments. Thus, the (2+1)-dimensional models proposed are
potentially applicable to model electromagnetic phenomena in certain planar
condensed-matter systems.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Benchmarking Metaheuristic-Integrated Quantum Approximate Optimisation
  Algorithm against Quantum Annealing for Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
  Optimization Problems
Authors: Arul Mazumder, Anuvab Sen, Udayon Sen
Date: 2023-09-28T18:55:22Z
Abstract:   The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is one of the most
promising Noisy Intermediate Quantum Algorithms (NISQ) in solving combinatorial
optimizations and displays potential over classical heuristic techniques.
Unfortunately, QAOA performance depends on the choice of parameters and
standard optimizers often fail to identify key parameters due to the complexity
and mystery of these optimization functions. In this paper, we benchmark QAOA
circuits modified with metaheuristic optimizers against classical and quantum
heuristics to identify QAOA parameters. The experimental results reveal
insights into the strengths and limitations of both Quantum Annealing and
metaheuristic-integrated QAOA across different problem domains. The findings
suggest that the hybrid approach can leverage classical optimization strategies
to enhance the solution quality and convergence speed of QAOA, particularly for
problems with rugged landscapes and limited quantum resources. Furthermore, the
study provides guidelines for selecting the most appropriate approach based on
the specific characteristics of the optimization problem at hand.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Low-depth Gaussian State Energy Estimation
Authors: Gumaro Rendon, Peter D. Johnson
Date: 2023-09-28T18:29:14Z
Abstract:   Recent progress in quantum computing is paving the way for the realization of
early fault-tolerant quantum computers. To maximize the utility of these
devices, it is important to develop quantum algorithms that match their
capabilities and limitations. Motivated by this, recent work has developed
low-depth quantum algorithms for ground state energy estimation (GSEE), an
important subroutine in quantum chemistry and materials. We detail a new GSEE
algorithm which, like recent work, uses a number of operations scaling as
$O(1/\Delta)$ as opposed to the typical $O(1/\epsilon)$, at the cost of an
increase in the number of circuit repetitions from $O(1)$ to $O(1/\epsilon^2)$.
The relevant features of this algorithm come about from using a Gaussian
window, which exponentially reduces contamination from excited states over the
simplest GSEE algorithm based on the Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT). We adapt
this algorithm to interpolate between the low-depth and full-depth regime by
replacing $\Delta$ with anything between $\Delta$ and $\epsilon$. At the cost
of increasing the number of ancilla qubits from $1$ to $O(\log\Delta)$, our
method reduces the upper bound on the number of circuit repetitions by a factor
of four compared to previous methods.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Computing, Math, and Physics (QCaMP): Introducing quantum
  computing in high schools
Authors: Megan Ivory, Alisa Bettale, Rachel Boren, Ashlyn D. Burch, Jake Douglass, Lisa Hackett, Boris Kiefer, Alina Kononov, Maryanne Long, Mekena Metcalf, Tzula B. Propp, Mohan Sarovar
Date: 2023-09-28T18:26:17Z
Abstract:   The nascent but rapidly growing field of Quantum Information Science and
Technology has led to an increased demand for skilled quantum workers and an
opportunity to build a diverse workforce at the outset. In order to meet this
demand and encourage women and underrepresented minorities in STEM to consider
a career in QIST, we have developed a curriculum for introducing quantum
computing to teachers and students at the high school level with no
prerequisites. In 2022, this curriculum was delivered over the course of two
one-week summer camps, one targeting teachers and another targeting students.
Here, we present an overview of the objectives, curriculum, and activities, as
well as results from the formal evaluation of both camps and the outlook for
expanding QCaMP in future years.


Category: hep-th
Title: Super Carrollian and Super Galilean Field Theories
Authors: Konstantinos Koutrolikos, Mojtaba Najafizadeh
Date: 2023-09-28T18:23:30Z
Abstract:   The exploration of scalar field theories that exhibit Carroll and Galilei
symmetries has attracted a lot of attention. In this paper, we generalize these
studies to fermionic field theories and construct consistent electric and
magnetic descriptions of Carrollian and Galilean spin $\tfrac{1}{2}$ fermions.
We showcase various methods that offer complementary perspectives into the
contraction process of the underlying relativistic theories. Moreover, we
extend our study to $\mathcal{N}=1$ off-shell supersymmetric field theories in
four dimensions. By introducing suitable Grassmann-analyticity conditions, we
formulate the corresponding super Carrollian and super Galilean theories. These
theories combine the established Carroll/Galilei scalars with the
Carroll/Galilei fermions and a range of auxiliary fields into supermultiplets.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Optical and spin coherence of Er$^{3+}$ in epitaxial CeO$_2$ on silicon
Authors: Jiefei Zhang, Gregory D. Grant, Ignas Masiulionis, Michael T. Solomon, Jasleen K. Bindra, Jens Niklas, Alan M. Dibos, Oleg G. Poluektov, F. Joseph Heremans, Supratik Guha, David D. Awschalom
Date: 2023-09-28T18:22:56Z
Abstract:   Solid-state atomic defects with optical transitions in the telecommunication
bands, potentially in a nuclear spin free environment, are important for
applications in fiber-based quantum networks. Erbium ions doped in CeO$_2$
offer such a desired combination. Here we report on the optical homogeneous
linewidth and electron spin coherence of Er$^{3+}$ ions doped in CeO$_2$
epitaxial film grown on a Si(111) substrate. The long-lived optical transition
near 1530 nm in the environmentally-protected 4f shell of Er$^{3+}$ shows a
narrow homogeneous linewidth of 440 kHz with an optical coherence time of 0.72
$\mu$s at 3.6 K. The reduced nuclear spin noise in the host allows for
Er$^{3+}$ electron spin polarization at 3.6 K, yielding an electron spin
coherence of 0.66 $\mu$s (in the isolated ion limit) and a spin relaxation of
2.5 ms. These findings indicate the potential of Er$^{3+}$:CeO$_2$ film as a
valuable platform for quantum networks and communication applications.


Category: hep-th
Title: BRST invariant scalar and vector operators in the
  $SU\left(2\right)\times U\left(1\right)$ Higgs model
Authors: David Dudal, Duifje Maria van Egmond, Giovani Peruzzo, Silvio Paolo Sorella
Date: 2023-09-28T18:12:44Z
Abstract:   We present a set of BRST invariant composite operators in the
$SU\left(2\right)\times U\left(1\right)$ Higgs model which exhibit an overlap
with the observable scalar and vector particle states of the theory. Some of
these operators are non-local in the standard formulation of the Higgs model,
however, we show that they can be localized using the Stuckelberg trick, this
without changing the physical content. These operators provide thus a BRST
invariant resolution of the physical spectrum of the theory, thereby giving the
next step in constructing a manifestly BRST invariant formulation of the
particle spectrum of the Electroweak and Standard model.


Category: quant-ph
Title: An intuitive construction of modular flow
Authors: Jonathan Sorce
Date: 2023-09-28T18:02:18Z
Abstract:   The theory of modular flow has proved extremely useful for applying
thermodynamic reasoning to out-of-equilibrium states in quantum field theory.
However, the standard proofs of the fundamental theorems of modular flow use
machinery from Fourier analysis on Banach spaces, and as such are not
especially transparent to an audience of physicists. In this article, I present
a construction of modular flow that differs from existing treatments. The main
pedagogical contribution is that I start with thermal physics via the KMS
condition, and derive the modular operator as the only operator that could
generate a thermal arrow of time, rather than starting with the modular
operator as the fundamental object of the theory. The main technical
contribution is a new proof of the fundamental theorem stating that modular
flow is a symmetry. The new proof circumvents the delicate issues of Fourier
analysis that appear in previous treatments, but is still mathematically
rigorous.


Category: hep-th
Title: An intuitive construction of modular flow
Authors: Jonathan Sorce
Date: 2023-09-28T18:02:18Z
Abstract:   The theory of modular flow has proved extremely useful for applying
thermodynamic reasoning to out-of-equilibrium states in quantum field theory.
However, the standard proofs of the fundamental theorems of modular flow use
machinery from Fourier analysis on Banach spaces, and as such are not
especially transparent to an audience of physicists. In this article, I present
a construction of modular flow that differs from existing treatments. The main
pedagogical contribution is that I start with thermal physics via the KMS
condition, and derive the modular operator as the only operator that could
generate a thermal arrow of time, rather than starting with the modular
operator as the fundamental object of the theory. The main technical
contribution is a new proof of the fundamental theorem stating that modular
flow is a symmetry. The new proof circumvents the delicate issues of Fourier
analysis that appear in previous treatments, but is still mathematically
rigorous.


Category: hep-th
Title: A note on the Hamiltonian structure of transgression forms
Authors: Pablo Pais, Patricio Salgado-Rebolledo, Aldo Vera
Date: 2023-09-28T18:00:13Z
Abstract:   By incorporating two gauge connections, transgression forms provide a
generalization of Chern-Simons actions that are genuinely gauge-invariant. In
this work, we show that, when defined on a manifold with a boundary, the
Hamiltonian formulation of a transgression field theory can be consistently
carried out without the need to implement regularizing boundary terms at the
level of first-class constraints. By considering boundary variations of the
relevant functionals in the Poisson brackets, the surface integral in the very
definition of a transgression action can be translated into boundary
contributions in the generators of gauge transformations and diffeomorphisms.
This prescription systematically leads to the corresponding surface charges of
the theory, reducing to the general expression for conserved charges in
(higher-dimensional) Chern-Simons theories when one of the gauge connections in
the transgression form is set to zero.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Evaluating analytic gradients of pulse programs on quantum computers
Authors: Korbinian Kottmann, Nathan Killoran
Date: 2023-09-28T18:00:04Z
Abstract:   Parametrized pulse programs running on quantum hardware can be differentiated
via the stochastic parameter-shift (SPS) rule. We overcome the intrinsically
approximate nature of SPS by introducing a new analytic method for computing
gradients of pulse programs, that we coin ODEgen. In this new method, we find
effective generators of pulse gates using a differentiable ordinary
differential equation (ODE) solver. These effective generators inform
parameter-shift rules that can be evaluated on quantum hardware. We showcase
simulated VQE examples with realistic superconducting transmon systems, for
which we obtain lower energies with fewer quantum resources using ODEgen over
SPS. We further demonstrate a pulse VQE run with gradients computed via ODEgen
entirely on quantum hardware.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gravitational Waves from Composite Dark Sectors
Authors: Roman Pasechnik, Manuel Reichert, Francesco Sannino, Zhi-Wei Wang
Date: 2023-09-28T18:00:04Z
Abstract:   We study under which conditions a first-order phase transition in a composite
dark sector can yield an observable stochastic gravitational-wave signal. To
this end, we employ the Linear-Sigma model featuring $N_f=3,4,5$ flavours and
perform a Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis computation also accounting for the effects
of the Polyakov loop. The model allows us to investigate the chiral phase
transition in regimes that can mimic QCD-like theories incorporating in
addition composite dynamics associated with the effects of
confinement-deconfinement phase transition. A further benefit of this approach
is that it allows to study the limit in which the effective interactions are
weak. We show that strong first-order phase transitions occur for weak
effective couplings of the composite sector leading to gravitational-wave
signals potentially detectable at future experimental facilities.


Category: hep-th
Title: Equivalence of 1-loop RG flows in 4d Chern-Simons and integrable 2d
  sigma-models
Authors: Nat Levine
Date: 2023-09-28T18:00:02Z
Abstract:   We argue for the matching of 1-loop divergences between 4d Chern-Simons
theory with Disorder defects and the corresponding integrable 2d sigma-models
of non-ultralocal type. Starting from the 4d path integral, we show under
general assumptions that the 1-loop divergences localise to the 2d defects.
They match the 'universal' formulae developed in [arXiv:2209.05502] for the
1-loop RG flows of integrable 2d sigma-models. Our argument uses an alternate
path integral representation for the 1-loop effective action and the known
classical equivalence between the 4d and 2d theories.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Modular quantum signal processing in many variables
Authors: Zane M. Rossi, Jack L. Ceroni, Isaac L. Chuang
Date: 2023-09-28T17:58:51Z
Abstract:   Despite significant advances in quantum algorithms, quantum programs in
practice are often expressed at the circuit level, forgoing helpful structural
abstractions common to their classical counterparts. Consequently, as many
quantum algorithms have been unified with the advent of quantum signal
processing (QSP) and quantum singular value transformation (QSVT), an
opportunity has appeared to cast these algorithms as modules that can be
combined to constitute complex programs. Complicating this, however, is that
while QSP/QSVT are often described by the polynomial transforms they apply to
the singular values of large linear operators, and the algebraic manipulation
of polynomials is simple, the QSP/QSVT protocols realizing analogous
manipulations of their embedded polynomials are non-obvious. Here we provide a
theory of modular multi-input-output QSP-based superoperators, the basic unit
of which we call a gadget, and show they can be snapped together with LEGO-like
ease at the level of the functions they apply. To demonstrate this ease, we
also provide a Python package for assembling gadgets and compiling them to
circuits. Viewed alternately, gadgets both enable the efficient block encoding
of large families of useful multivariable functions, and substantiate a
functional-programming approach to quantum algorithm design in recasting QSP
and QSVT as monadic types.


Category: hep-th
Title: Aspects of $T\bar{T}+J\bar{T }$ deformed 2D topological gravity : from
  partition function to late-time SFF
Authors: Arpan Bhattacharyya, Saptaswa Ghosh, Sounak Pal
Date: 2023-09-28T17:57:10Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we investigate different thermodynamic properties of
$T\bar{T}+J\bar{T }$ deformed 2D-gravity. First, we compute the partition
function of $U(1)$ coupled 2D-gravity with fixed chemical potential, obtained
from the dimensional reduction of the four-dimensional Einstein-Maxwell theory.
Then, we compute the partition function of the deformed theory and study the
genus expansion of the one and two-point correlation function of the partition
function of the theory. Subsequently, we use the one-point function to compute
the ``Annealed'' and ``Quenched'' free energy in low-temperature limits and
make a qualitative comparison with the undeformed theory. Then, using the
two-point function, we compute the Spectral Form Factor of the deformed theory
in early and late time. We find a dip and ramp structure in early and late
time, respectively. We also get a plateau structure in the $\tau$-scaling
limit. Last but not least, we comment on the late-time topology change to give
a physical interpretation of the ramp of the Spectral Form Factor for our
theory.


Category: hep-th
Title: A Long Exact Sequence in Symmetry Breaking: order parameter constraints,
  defect anomaly-matching, and higher Berry phases
Authors: Arun Debray, Sanath K. Devalapurkar, Cameron Krulewski, Yu Leon Liu, Natalia Pacheco-Tallaj, Ryan Thorngren
Date: 2023-09-28T17:57:08Z
Abstract:   We study defects in symmetry breaking phases, such as domain walls, vortices,
and hedgehogs. In particular, we focus on the localized gapless excitations
which sometimes occur at the cores of these objects. These are topologically
protected by an 't Hooft anomaly. We classify different symmetry breaking
phases in terms of the anomalies of these defects, and relate them to the
anomaly of the broken symmetry by an anomaly-matching formula. We also derive
the obstruction to the existence of a symmetry breaking phase with a local
defect. We obtain these results using a long exact sequence of groups of
invertible field theories, which we call the "symmetry breaking long exact
sequence" (SBLES). The mathematical backbone of the SBLES is the Smith
homomorphism, a family of maps between twisted bordism groups. Though many
examples have been studied, we give the first completely general account of the
Smith homomorphism. We lift it to a map of Thom spectra and identify the
cofiber, producing a long exact sequence of twisted bordism groups; the SBLES
is the Anderson dual of that long exact sequence. Our work develops further the
theory of higher Berry phase and its bulk-boundary correspondence and serves as
a new computational tool for classifying symmetry protected topological phases.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Monogamy of highly symmetric states
Authors: Rene Allerstorfer, Matthias Christandl, Dmitry Grinko, Ion Nechita, Maris Ozols, Denis Rochette, Philip Verduyn Lunel
Date: 2023-09-28T17:55:21Z
Abstract:   We study the question of how highly entangled two particles can be when also
entangled in a similar way with other particles on the complete graph for the
case of Werner, isotropic and Brauer states. In order to do so we solve
optimization problems motivated by many-body physics, computational complexity
and quantum cryptography. We formalize our question as a semi-definite program
and then solve this optimization problem analytically, using tools from
representation theory. In particular, we determine the exact maximum values of
the projection to the maximally entangled state and antisymmetric Werner state
possible, solving long-standing open problems. We find these optimal values by
use of SDP duality and representation theory of the symmetric and orthogonal
groups, and the Brauer algebra.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Diffusion coefficients preserving long-time correlations: Consequences
  on the Einstein relation and on entanglement in a bosonic Bogoliubov system
Authors: Yamen Hamdouni
Date: 2023-09-28T17:54:27Z
Abstract:   We analytically derive the diffusion coefficients that drive a system of $N$
coupled harmonic oscillators to an equilibrium state exhibiting persistent
correlations. It is shown that the main effect of the latter consists in a
renormalization of the natural frequencies and the friction coefficients of the
oscillators. We find that the Einstein relation may be satisfied at low
temperatures with frequency-dependent effective friction coefficients, provided
that the physical constraints are fulfilled. We also investigate the
entanglement evolution in a bipartite bosonic Bogoliubov system initially
prepared in a thermal squeezed state. It is found that, in contrast to what one
may expect, strong coupling slows down the entanglement sudden death, and for
initially separable states, entanglement generation may occur.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Anomalous Purcell decay of strongly driven inhomogeneous emitters
  coupled to a cavity
Authors: Michael T. Solomon, Martin Koppenhöfer, Cheng Ji, Gregory Grant, Ignas Masiulionis, Sean E. Sullivan, F. Joseph Heremans, Supratik Guha, David D. Awschalom, Aashish A. Clerk, Alan M. Dibos
Date: 2023-09-28T17:49:24Z
Abstract:   We perform resonant fluorescence lifetime measurements on a
nanocavity-coupled erbium ensemble as a function of cavity-laser detuning and
pump power. Our measurements reveal an anomalous suppression of the ensemble
decay lifetime at zero cavity detuning and high pump fluence. We capture
qualitative aspects of this decay rate suppression using a Tavis-Cummings model
of non-interacting spins coupled to a common cavity.


Category: hep-th
Title: Brick wall diagrams as a completely integrable system
Authors: Moritz Kade, Matthias Staudacher
Date: 2023-09-28T17:49:17Z
Abstract:   We study the free energy of an integrable, planar, chiral and non-unitary
four-dimensional Yukawa theory, the bi-fermion fishnet theory discovered by
Pittelli and Preti. The typical Feynman-diagrams of this model are of regular
"brick-wall"-type, replacing the regular square lattices of standard fishnet
theory. We adapt A. B. Zamolodchikov's powerful classic computation of the
thermodynamic free energy of fishnet graphs to the brick-wall case in a
transparent fashion, and find the result in closed form. Finally, we propose
two further candidate integrable models in three and six dimensions.


Category: hep-th
Title: Positivity restrictions on the mixing of dimension-eight SMEFT operators
Authors: Mikael Chala, Xu Li
Date: 2023-09-28T17:10:00Z
Abstract:   We discuss the structure of the mixing among dimension-eight operators in the
SMEFT relying on the positivity of two-to-two forward scattering amplitudes. We
uncover tens of new non-trivial zeros as well as hundreds of terms with
definite sign in (a particular basis of) the corresponding anomalous dimension
matrix. We highlight that our results are not immediately apparent from the
Feynman diagrammatic perspective, nor from on-shell amplitude methods. As a
byproduct of this work, we provide positivity bounds not previously derived in
the literature, as well as explicit values of certain elements of the anomalous
dimension matrix that serve for cross-check of our results.


Category: hep-th
Title: Multicollinear Singularities in Celestial CFT
Authors: Adam Ball, Yangrui Hu, Sabrina Pasterski
Date: 2023-09-28T17:04:33Z
Abstract:   The purpose of this paper is to study the holomorphic multicollinear limit of
(celestial) amplitudes and use it to further investigate the double residue
condition for (hard celestial) amplitudes and the celestial operator product
expansion. We first set up the notion of holomorphic multicollinear limits of
amplitudes and derive the 3-collinear splitting functions for Yang-Mills
theory, Einstein gravity, and massless $\phi^3$ theory. In particular, we find
that in $\phi^3$ theory the celestial 3-OPE contains a term with a branch cut.
This explicit example confirms that branch cuts can obstruct the double residue
condition for hard celestial amplitudes, which is the underlying cause of the
celestial Jacobi identities not holding for certain theories. This addresses an
ongoing debate in the literature about associativity of the celestial OPEs and
concretely demonstrates a new (multi-particle) term in the celestial OPE coming
from the multi-particle channel in the amplitudes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Constraining Ultralight Dark Matter through an Accelerated Resonant
  Search
Authors: Zitong Xu, Xiaolin Ma, Kai Wei, Yuxuan He, Xing Heng, Xiaofei Huang, Tengyu Ai, Jian Liao, Wei Ji, Jia Liu, Xiao-Ping Wang, Dmitry Budker
Date: 2023-09-28T17:03:26Z
Abstract:   Experiments aimed at detecting ultralight dark matter typically rely on
resonant effects, which are sensitive to the dark matter mass that matches the
resonance frequency. In this study, we investigate the nucleon couplings of
ultralight axion dark matter using a magnetometer operating in a nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) mode. Our approach involves the use of a $^{21}$Ne
spin-based sensor, which features the lowest nuclear magnetic moment among
noble-gas spins. This configuration allows us to achieve an ultrahigh
sensitivity of 0.73 fT/Hz$^{1/2}$ at around 5 Hz, corresponding to energy
resolution of approximately 1.5$\times
  10^{-23}\,\rm{eV/Hz^{1/2}}$. Our analysis reveals that under certain
conditions it is beneficial to scan the frequency with steps significantly
larger than the resonance width. The analytical results are in agreement with
experimental data and the scan strategy is potentially applicable to other
resonant searches. Further, our study establishes stringent constraints on
axion-like particles (ALP) in the 4.5--15.5 Hz Compton-frequency range coupling
to neutrons and protons, improving on prior work by several-fold. Within a band
around 4.6--6.6 Hz and around 7.5 Hz, our laboratory findings surpass
astrophysical limits derived from neutron-star cooling. Hence, we demonstrate
an accelerated resonance search for ultralight dark matter, achieving an
approximately 30-fold increase in scanning step while maintaining competitive
sensitivity.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Local minima in quantum systems
Authors: Chi-Fang Chen, Hsin-Yuan Huang, John Preskill, Leo Zhou
Date: 2023-09-28T16:59:05Z
Abstract:   Finding ground states of quantum many-body systems is known to be hard for
both classical and quantum computers. As a result, when Nature cools a quantum
system in a low-temperature thermal bath, the ground state cannot always be
found efficiently. Instead, Nature finds a local minimum of the energy. In this
work, we study the problem of finding local minima in quantum systems under
thermal perturbations. While local minima are much easier to find than ground
states, we show that finding a local minimum is computationally hard for
classical computers, even when the task is to output a single-qubit observable
at any local minimum. In contrast, we prove that a quantum computer can always
find a local minimum efficiently using a thermal gradient descent algorithm
that mimics the cooling process in Nature. To establish the classical hardness
of finding local minima, we consider a family of two-dimensional Hamiltonians
such that any problem solvable by polynomial-time quantum algorithms can be
reduced to finding ground states of these Hamiltonians. We prove that for such
Hamiltonians, all local minima are global minima. Therefore, assuming quantum
computation is more powerful than classical computation, finding local minima
is classically hard and quantumly easy.


Category: hep-th
Title: Perverse coherent extensions on Calabi-Yau threefolds and
  representations of cohomological Hall algebras
Authors: Dylan Butson, Miroslav Rapcak
Date: 2023-09-28T16:39:18Z
Abstract:   For $Y\to X$ a toric Calabi-Yau threefold resolution and $M\in
\DD^b\Coh(Y)^T$ satisfying some hypotheses, we define a stack $\mf M(Y,M)$
parameterizing \emph{perverse coherent extensions} of $M$, iterated extensions
of $M$ and the compactly supported perverse coherent sheaves of Bridgeland. We
define framed variants $\mf M^\f(Y,M)$, prove that they are equivalent to
stacks of representations of framed quivers with potential $(Q^\f,W^\f)$, and
deduce natural monad presentations for these sheaves. Moreover, following
Soibelman we prove that the homology $H_\bullet(\mf
M^{\f,\zeta}(Y,M),\varphi_{W^\f})$ of the space of $\zeta$-stable, $\f$-framed
perverse coherent extensions of $M$, with coefficients in the sheaf
$\varphi_{W^\f}$ of vanishing cycles for $W^\f$, is a representation of the
Kontsevich-Soibelman cohomological Hall algebra of $Y$.
  For $M=\mc O_Y[1]$, $\mf M^{\f}(Y,M)$ is the stack of perverse coherent
systems of Nagao-Nakajima, so $\bb V_Y^\zeta=H_\bullet(\mf
M^{\f,\zeta}(Y,M),\varphi_{W^\f})$ is the DT/PT series of $Y$ for
$\zeta=\zeta_{\DT/\PT}$ by Szendroi and \emph{loc. cit.}, and we conjecture
that $\V_Y^{\zeta_\NCDT}$ is the vacuum module for the quiver Yangian of
Li-Yamazaki. For $M=\mc O_S[1]$ with $S\subset Y$ a divisor, $\mf M^{\f}(Y,M)$
provides a definition in algebraic geometry for Nekrasov's spiked instanton
variant of the ADHM construction, and analogous variants of the constructions
of Kronheimer-Nakajima, Nakajima-Yoshioka, and Finkelberg-Rybnikov. We
conjecture that $H_\bullet(\mf M^{\f,\zeta}(Y,M),\varphi_{W^{\f}})$ is the
vacuum module of the vertex algebra $\V(Y,S)$ defined by the \mbox{authors} in
a companion paper, generalizing the AGT conjecture to this setting. For $Y\to
X=\{xy-z^mw^n\}$, this gives a geometric approach to the relationship between
$W$-algebras and Yangians for affine $\gl_{m|n}$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum flux operators for Carrollian diffeomorphism in general
  dimensions
Authors: Ang Li, Wen-Bin Liu, Jiang Long, Run-Ze Yu
Date: 2023-09-28T16:28:18Z
Abstract:   We construct Carrollian scalar field theories in general dimensions, mainly
focusing on the boundaries of Minkowski and Rindler spacetime, whose quantum
flux operators form a faithful representation of Carrollian diffeomorphism up
to a central charge, respectively. At future/past null infinity, the fluxes are
physically observable and encode rich information of the radiation. The central
charge may be regularized to be finite by spectral zeta function or heat kernel
method on the unit sphere. For the theory at the Rindler horizon, the effective
central charge is proportional to the area of the bifurcation surface after
regularization. Moreover, the zero mode of supertranslation is identified as
the modular Hamiltonian, linking Carrollian diffeomorphism to quantum
information theory. Our results may hold for general null hypersurfaces and
provide new insight in the study of the Carrollian field theory, asymptotic
symmetry group and entanglement entropy.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Influence of correlations in active medium on pump-induced exceptional
  points and strong coupling
Authors: I. S. Pashkevich, I. V. Doronin, A. A. Zyablovsky, E. S. Andrianov
Date: 2023-09-28T16:23:05Z
Abstract:   Exceptional points show great prospects for applications such as imaging,
sensing and designing lasers. Recently, systems with amplifying active medium
exhibiting pump-induced exceptional points have attracted much attention due to
possibility of controlling strong coupling between light and matter with the
aid of pumping. In such structures, the interaction of active molecules with
external degrees of freedom, such as phonons or impurities, leads to the
destruction of the correlation between polarizations of different molecules. We
study the effect of the correlations decay on a system behavior near
pump-induced exceptional point. We show that strong coupling persists and
eigenvectors together with eigenfrequencies coalesce at a negative value of
population inversion, regardless of correlation decay magnitude. Thus, we show
that exceptional points are robust to correlation decay, which is crucial for
designing systems with exceptional points.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantization of Weyl invariant unimodular gravity with antisymmetric
  ghost fields
Authors: David Garcia-Lopez, Carmelo P. Martin
Date: 2023-09-28T16:13:27Z
Abstract:   The enforcement of the unimodularity condition in a gravity theory by means
of a Lagrange multiplier leads, in general, to inconsistencies upon
quantization. This is so, in particular, when the classic linear splitting of
the metric between the background and quantum fields is used. To avoid the need
of introducing such a Lagrange multiplier while using the classic linear
splitting, we carry out the quantization of unimodular gravity with extra Weyl
symmetry by using Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) techniques. Here, two gauge
symmetries are to be gauge-fixed: transverse diffeomorphisms and Weyl
transformations. We perform the gauge-fixing of the transverse diffeomorphism
invariance by using BRST transformations that involve antisymmetric ghost
fields. We show that these BRST transformations are compatible with the BRST
transformations needed to gauge-fix the Weyl symmetry, so that they can be
combined in a set of transformations generated by a single BRST operator.
Newton's law of gravitation is derived within the BRST formalism we put forward
as well as the Slavnov-Taylor equation.


Category: hep-th
Title: Revealing the Landscape of Globally Color-Dual Multi-loop Integrands
Authors: Alex Edison, James Mangan, Nicolas H. Pavao
Date: 2023-09-28T16:13:21Z
Abstract:   We report on progress in understanding how to construct color-dual multi-loop
amplitudes. First we identify a cubic theory, semi-abelian Yang-Mills, that
unifies many of the color-dual theories studied in the literature, and provides
a prescriptive approach for constructing $D$-dimensional color-dual numerators
through one-loop directly from Feynman rules. By a simple weight counting
argument, this approach does not further generalize to two-loops. As a first
step in understanding the two-loop challenge, we use a $D$-dimensional
color-dual bootstrap to successfully construct globally color-dual local
two-loop four-point nonlinear sigma model (NLSM) numerators. The double-copy of
these NLSM numerators with themselves, pure Yang-Mills, and $\mathcal{N}=4$
super-Yang-Mills correctly reproduce the known unitarity constructed integrands
of special Galileons, Born-Infeld theory, and Dirac-Born-Infeld-Volkov-Akulov
theory, respectively. Applying our bootstrap to two-loop four-point pure
Yang-Mills, we exhaustively search the space of local numerators and find that
it fails to satisfy global color-kinematics duality, completing a search
previously initiated in the literature. We pinpoint the failure to the bowtie
unitarity cut, and discuss a path forward towards non-local construction of
color-dual integrands at generic loop order.


Category: quant-ph
Title: SU(d)-Symmetric Random Unitaries: Quantum Scrambling, Error Correction,
  and Machine Learning
Authors: Zimu Li, Han Zheng, Yunfei Wang, Liang Jiang, Zi-Wen Liu, Junyu Liu
Date: 2023-09-28T16:12:31Z
Abstract:   Quantum information processing in the presence of continuous symmetry is of
wide importance and exhibits many novel physical and mathematical phenomena.
SU(d) is a continuous symmetry group of particular interest since it represents
a fundamental type of non-Abelian symmetry and also plays a vital role in
quantum computation. Here, we explicate the applications of SU(d)-symmetric
random unitaries in three different contexts ranging from physics to quantum
computing: information scrambling with non-Abelian conserved quantities,
covariant quantum error correcting random codes, and geometric quantum machine
learning. First, we show that, in the presence of SU(d) symmetry, the local
conserved quantities would exhibit residual values even at $t \rightarrow
\infty$ which decays as $\Omega(1/n^{3/2})$ under local Pauli basis for qubits
and $\Omega(1/n^{(d+2)^2/2})$ under local symmetric basis for general qudits
with respect to the system size, in contrast to $O(1/n)$ decay for U(1) case
and the exponential decay for no-symmetry case in the sense of out-of-time
ordered correlator (OTOC). Second, we show that SU(d)-symmetric unitaries can
be used to construct asymptotically optimal (in the sense of saturating the
fundamental limits on the code error that have been called the approximate
Eastin-Knill theorems) SU(d)-covariant codes that encodes any constant $k$
logical qudits, extending [Kong \& Liu; PRXQ 3, 020314 (2022)]. Finally, we
derive an overpartameterization threshold via the quantum neural tangent kernel
(QNTK) required for exponential convergence guarantee of generic ansatz for
geometric quantum machine learning, which reveals that the number of parameters
required scales only with the dimension of desired subspaces rather than that
of the entire Hilbert space. We expect that our work invites further research
on quantum information with continuous symmetries.


Category: hep-th
Title: Anisotropic scale-separated AdS$_4$ flux vacua
Authors: George Tringas
Date: 2023-09-28T15:53:53Z
Abstract:   We present minimally supersymmetric AdS$_4$ flux vacua derived from massive
type IIA compactified on $T^6/\mathbb{Z}_3\times \mathbb{Z}_3$ orbifold,
characterized by unconstrained fluxes with general scaling. We discover
anisotropic scaling solutions where scale separation is realized in the
supergravity limit and the subvolumes of the internal space become large and
anisotropic for large values of unconstrained fluxes. Additionally, we identify
regimes where subvolumes are either shrinking or remain constant while scale
separation is either broken or realized. Then we employ a probe anti-D4-brane
to interpolate between vacua, finding that it interpolates through the regimes
we previously identified. Finally, we utilize an open string modulus of the
anti-D4-brane to calculate the distance between vacua for the regime where
scale separation is realized in the supergravity limit. We show the dependence
of both the geodesic distance and the distance conjecture parameter on the flux
scaling.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Time Crystal Embodies Chimera in Periodically Driven Quantum Spin System
Authors: Mahbub Rahaman, Akitada Sakurai, Analabha Roy
Date: 2023-09-28T15:31:55Z
Abstract:   Chimera states are a captivating occurrence in which a system comprised of
multiple interconnected elements exhibits a distinctive combination of
synchronized and desynchronized behavior. The emergence of these states can be
attributed to the complex interdependence between quantum entanglement and the
delicate balance of interactions among system constituents. The emergence of
Discrete Time Crystal (DTC) in typical many-body periodically driven systems
occurs when there is a breaking of time translation symmetry. Coexisting
coupled DTC and a ferromagnetic dynamically many-body localized (DMBL) phase at
distinct regions have been investigated under the controlled spin rotational
error of a disorder-free spin-1/2 chain for different types of spin-spin
interactions. We contribute a novel approach for the emergence of the
DTC-DMBL-Chimera phase, which is robust against external static fields in a
periodically driven quantum many-body system.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum hobbit routing: Annealer implementation of generalized
  Travelling Salesperson Problem
Authors: Iñigo Perez Delgado, Beatriz García Markaida, Aitor Moreno Fdez. de Leceta, Jon Ander Ochoa Uriarte
Date: 2023-09-28T15:28:50Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we present an implementation of a Job Selection Problem (JSP)
-- a generalization of the well-known Travelling Salesperson Problem (TSP) --
of $N=9$ jobs on its Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) form,
using $\mathcal{O}(N)$ qubits on DWave's Advantage$\_$system4.1 quantum
annealing device. The best known quantum algorithm for TSP to date uses
$\mathcal{O}(N^2)$ qubits. A solution is found using the quantum method.
However, since hardware is not yet able to compensate the increase in
search-space size, no present overall advantage is achieved when comparing the
quantum results with either exhaustive or equiprobably sampled classical
solutions of the problem.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Engineering Entangled Coherent States of Magnons and Phonons via a
  Transmon Qubit
Authors: Marios Kounalakis, Silvia Viola Kusminskiy, Yaroslav M. Blanter
Date: 2023-09-28T15:20:36Z
Abstract:   We propose a scheme for generating and controlling entangled coherent states
(ECS) of magnons, i.e. the quanta of the collective spin excitations in
magnetic systems, or phonons in mechanical resonators. The proposed hybrid
circuit architecture comprises a superconducting transmon qubit coupled to a
pair of magnonic Yttrium Iron Garnet (YIG) spherical resonators or mechanical
beam resonators via flux-mediated interactions. Specifically, the coupling
results from the magnetic/mechanical quantum fluctuations modulating the qubit
inductor, formed by a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). We
show that the resulting radiation-pressure interaction of the qubit with each
mode, can be employed to generate maximally-entangled states of magnons or
phonons. In addition, we numerically demonstrate a protocol for the preparation
of magnonic and mechanical Bell states with high fidelity including realistic
dissipation mechanisms. Furthermore, we have devised a scheme for reading out
the prepared states using standard qubit control and resonator field
displacements. Our work demonstrates an alternative platform for quantum
information using ECS in hybrid magnonic and mechanical quantum networks.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Layer Codes
Authors: Dominic J. Williamson, Nouédyn Baspin
Date: 2023-09-28T15:11:37Z
Abstract:   The surface code is a two dimensional topological code with code parameters
that scale optimally with the number of physical qubits, under the constraint
of two dimensional locality. In three spatial dimensions an analogous simple
yet optimal code was not previously known. Here, we introduce a construction
that takes as input a stabilizer code and produces as output a three
dimensional topological code with related code parameters. The output codes
have the special structure of being topological defect networks formed by
layers of surface code joined along one dimensional junctions, with a maximum
stabilizer check weight of six. When the input is a family of good low density
parity check codes, the output is a three dimensional topological code with
optimal scaling code parameters and a polynomial energy barrier.


Category: hep-th
Title: Excited Dirac stars with higher azimuthal harmonic index
Authors: Long-Xing Huang, Shi-Xian Sun, Rong Zhang, Chen Liang, Yong-Qiang Wang
Date: 2023-09-28T15:05:29Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we investigate the properties of the first excited state Dirac
stars (DSs) with higher azimuthal harmonic index (specifically, the azimuthal
harmonic indexes $m_D$ = $3/2$, $5/2$, $7/2$), as well as the relationship
between the ADM mass and angular momentum of Dirac stars with respect to
frequency. Moreover, We find that the ergospheres of DSs appear at lower spinor
field frequencies, and both the ergospheres and the distribution of the spinor
field functions are asymmetric about the equatorial plane. Furthermore, we
introduce the ground state scalar field and examine its impact on this system,
which is known as the multi-state Dirac-boson stars (DBSs) model. We show
various types of solution families for DBSs under both synchronized frequency
$\omega$ and nonsynchronized frequencies and find that similar to DSs, the
spinor field and the ergospheres of DBSs are also asymmetric about the
equatorial plane, but the ergospheres appear at higher spinor field
frequencies.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Circuit-to-Hamiltonian from tensor networks and fault tolerance
Authors: Anurag Anshu, Nikolas P. Breuckmann, Quynh T. Nguyen
Date: 2023-09-28T14:39:13Z
Abstract:   We define a map from an arbitrary quantum circuit to a local Hamiltonian
whose ground state encodes the quantum computation. All previous maps relied on
the Feynman-Kitaev construction, which introduces an ancillary `clock register'
to track the computational steps. Our construction, on the other hand, relies
on injective tensor networks with associated parent Hamiltonians, avoiding the
introduction of a clock register. This comes at the cost of the ground state
containing only a noisy version of the quantum computation, with independent
stochastic noise. We can remedy this - making our construction robust - by
using quantum fault tolerance. In addition to the stochastic noise, we show
that any state with energy density exponentially small in the circuit depth
encodes a noisy version of the quantum computation with adversarial noise. We
also show that any `combinatorial state' with energy density polynomially small
in depth encodes the quantum computation with adversarial noise. This serves as
evidence that any state with energy density polynomially small in depth has a
similar property. As an application, we show that contracting injective tensor
networks to additive error is BQP-hard. We also discuss the implication of our
construction to the quantum PCP conjecture, combining with an observation that
QMA verification can be done in logarithmic depth.


Category: hep-th
Title: Non-Gaussian statistics of de Sitter spectators: A perturbative
  derivation of stochastic dynamics
Authors: Gonzalo A. Palma, Spyros Sypsas
Date: 2023-09-28T14:38:13Z
Abstract:   Scalar fields interacting with the primordial curvature perturbation during
inflation may communicate their statistics to the latter. This situation
motivates the study of how the probability density function (PDF) of a light
spectator field $\varphi$ in a pure de Sitter space-time, becomes non-Gaussian
under the influence of a scalar potential ${\mathcal V(\varphi)}$. One approach
to this problem is offered by the stochastic formalism introduced by
Starobinsky and Yokoyama. It results in a Fokker-Planck equation for the
time-dependent PDF $\rho (\varphi , t)$ describing the statistics of $\varphi$
which, in the limit of equilibrium gives one back the solution $\rho (\varphi)
\propto \exp \big[ - \frac{8 \pi^2}{3 H^4} {\mathcal V(\varphi)} \big]$. We
study the derivation of $\rho (\varphi , t)$ using quantum field theory tools.
Our approach yields an almost Gaussian distribution function, distorted by
minor corrections comprised of terms proportional to powers of $\Delta N \times
\mathcal O(\partial_\varphi) {\mathcal V(\varphi)}$, where $\Delta N$ is the
number of $e$-folds succeeding the Hubble-horizon crossing of $\varphi$'s
wavelengths, and $\mathcal O(\partial_\varphi)$ stands for a derivative
operator acting on ${\mathcal V(\varphi)}$. This general form is obtained
perturbatively and remains valid even with loop corrections. Our solution
satisfies a Fokker-Planck equation that receives corrections with respect to
the one found within the stochastic approach, allowing us to comment on the
validity of the standard equilibrium solution for generic potentials. We posit
that higher order corrections to the Fokker-Planck equation may become
important towards the equilibrium.


Category: quant-ph
Title: QUBO Resolution of the Job Reassignment Problem
Authors: Iñigo Perez Delgado, Beatriz García Markaida, Alejandro Mata Ali, Aitor Moreno Fdez. de Leceta
Date: 2023-09-28T14:37:23Z
Abstract:   We present a subproblemation scheme for heuristical solving of the JSP (Job
Reassignment Problem). The cost function of the JSP is described via a QUBO
hamiltonian to allow implementation in both gate-based and annealing quantum
computers. For a job pool of $K$ jobs, $\mathcal{O}(K^2)$ binary variables --
qubits -- are needed to solve the full problem, for a runtime of
$\mathcal{O}(2^{K^2})$. With the presented heuristics, the average variable
number of each of the $D$ subproblems to solve is $\mathcal{O}(K^2/2D)$, and
the expected total runtime $\mathcal{O}(D2^{K^2/2D})$, achieving an exponential
speedup.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Machine-learning-inspired quantum optimal control of nonadiabatic
  geometric quantum computation via reverse engineering
Authors: Meng-Yun Mao, Zheng Cheng, Yan Xia, Andrzej M. Oleś, Wen-Long You
Date: 2023-09-28T14:36:26Z
Abstract:   Quantum control plays an irreplaceable role in practical use of quantum
computers. However, some challenges have to be overcome to find more suitable
and diverse control parameters. We propose a promising and generalizable
average-fidelity-based machine-learning-inspired method to optimize the control
parameters, in which a neural network with periodic feature enhancement is used
as an ansatz. In the implementation of a single-qubit gate by cat-state
nonadiabatic geometric quantum computation via reverse engineering, compared
with the control parameters in the simple form of a trigonometric function, our
approach can yield significantly higher-fidelity ($>99.99\%$) phase gates, such
as the $\pi / 8$ gate (T gate). Single-qubit gates are robust against
systematic noise, additive white Gaussian noise and decoherence. We numerically
demonstrate that the neural network possesses the ability to expand the model
space. With the help of our optimization, we provide a feasible way to
implement cascaded multi-qubit gates with high quality in a bosonic system.
Therefore, the machine-learning-inspired method may be feasible in quantum
optimal control of nonadiabatic geometric quantum computation.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Entangling extreme ultraviolet photons through strong field pair
  generation
Authors: Jamison Sloan, Alexey Gorlach, Matan Even Tzur, Nicholas Rivera, Oren Cohen, Ido Kaminer, Marin Soljačić
Date: 2023-09-28T14:27:39Z
Abstract:   Entangled photon pairs are a vital resource for quantum information,
computation, and metrology. Although these states are routinely generated at
optical frequencies, sources of quantum of light are notably lacking at extreme
ultraviolet (XUV) and soft X-ray frequencies. Here, we show that strongly
driven systems used for high harmonic generation (HHG) can become versatile
sources of entangled photon pairs at these high frequencies. We present a
general theory of photon pair emission from non-perturbatively driven systems,
which we refer to as "strong field pair generation" (SFPG). We show that
strongly driven noble gases can generate thousands of entangled pairs per shot
over a large XUV bandwidth. The emitted pairs have distinctive properties in
angle and frequency, which can be exploited to discriminate them from the
background HHG signal. We connect SFPG theory to the three-step-model of HHG,
showing that this pair emission originates from the impact of high frequency
vacuum fluctuations on electron recombination. The light produced by SFPG
exhibits attosecond Hong-Ou-Mandel correlations, and can be leveraged as a
source of heralded single photon attosecond pulses. Our findings aid ongoing
efforts to propel quantum optics into the XUV and beyond.


Category: hep-th
Title: Modular symmetry in magnetized $T^{2g}$ torus and orbifold models
Authors: Shota Kikuchi, Tatsuo Kobayashi, Kaito Nasu, Shohei Takada, Hikaru Uchida
Date: 2023-09-28T13:56:40Z
Abstract:   We study the modular symmetry in magnetized $T^{2g}$ torus and orbifold
models. The $T^{2g}$ torus has the modular symmetry
$\Gamma_{g}=Sp(2g,\mathbb{Z})$. Magnetic flux background breaks the modular
symmetry to a certain normalizer $N_{g}(H)$. We classify remaining modular
symmetries by magnetic flux matrix types. Furthermore, we study the modular
symmetry for wave functions on the magnetized $T^{2g}$ and certain orbifolds.
It is found that wave functions on magnetized $T^{2g}$ as well as its orbifolds
behave as the Siegel modular forms of weight $1/2$ and
$\widetilde{N}_{g}(H,h)$, which is the metapletic congruence subgroup of the
double covering group of $N_{g}(H)$, $\widetilde{N}_{g}(H)$. Then, wave
functions transform non-trivially under the quotient group,
$\widetilde{N}_{g,h}=\widetilde{N}_{g}(H)/\widetilde{N}_{g}(H,h)$, where the
level $h$ is related to the determinant of the magnetic flux matrix.
Accordingly, the corresponding four-dimensional (4D) chiral fields also
transform non-trivially under $\widetilde{N}_{g,h}$ modular flavor
transformation with modular weight $-1/2$. We also study concrete modular
flavor symmetries of wave functions on magnetized $T^{2g}$ orbifolds.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quasi-local masses and cosmological coupling of black holes and
  mimickers
Authors: Mariano Cadoni, Riccardo Murgia, Mirko Pitzalis, Andrea P. Sanna
Date: 2023-09-28T13:55:06Z
Abstract:   Motivated by the recent heated debate on whether the masses of local objects,
such as compact stars or black holes (BHs), may be affected by the large-scale,
cosmological dynamics, we analyze the conditions under which, in a general
relativity framework, such a coupling small/large scales is allowed. We shed
light on some controversial arguments, which have been used to rule out the
latter possibility. We argue that the actual observational quantity at play is
the quasi-local Misner-Sharp mass (MS), and we find that the cosmological
coupling occurs whenever the energy of the central object is quantified by it.
Conversely, the decoupling occurs whenever the MS mass is fully equivalent to
the (nonlocal) Arnowitt-Deser-Misner (ADM) mass. Consequently, for singular BHs
embedded in cosmological backgrounds, like the Schwarzschild-de Sitter or
McVittie solutions, we show that there is no cosmological coupling, confirming
previous results in the literature. Furthermore, we show that nonsingular
compact objects couple to the cosmological background, as quantified by their
MS mass. We conclude that observational evidence of cosmological coupling of
astrophysical BHs would be the smoking gun of their nonsingular nature.


Category: hep-th
Title: On symbology and differential equations of Feynman integrals from
  Schubert analysis
Authors: Song He, Xuhang Jiang, Jiahao Liu, Qinglin Yang
Date: 2023-09-28T13:48:20Z
Abstract:   We take the first step in generalizing the so-called "Schubert analysis",
originally proposed in twistor space for four-dimensional kinematics, to the
study of symbol letters and more detailed information on canonical differential
equations for Feynman integral families in general dimensions with general
masses. The basic idea is to work in embedding space and compute possible
cross-ratios built from (Lorentz products of) maximal cut solutions for all
integrals in the family. We demonstrate the power of the method using the most
general one-loop integrals, as well as various two-loop planar integral
families (such as sunrise, double-triangle and double-box) in general
dimensions. Not only can we obtain all symbol letters as cross-ratios from
maximal-cut solutions, but we also reproduce entries in the canonical
differential equations satisfied by a basis of dlog integrals.


Category: quant-ph
Title: QSETH strikes again: finer quantum lower bounds for lattice problem,
  strong simulation, hitting set problem, and more
Authors: Yanlin Chen, Yilei Chen, Rajendra Kumar, Subhasree Patro, Florian Speelman
Date: 2023-09-28T13:30:20Z
Abstract:   While seemingly undesirable, it is not a surprising fact that there are
certain problems for which quantum computers offer no computational advantage
over their respective classical counterparts. Moreover, there are problems for
which there is no `useful' computational advantage possible with the current
quantum hardware. This situation however can be beneficial if we don't want
quantum computers to solve certain problems fast - say problems relevant to
post-quantum cryptography. In such a situation, we would like to have evidence
that it is difficult to solve those problems on quantum computers; but what is
their exact complexity?
  To do so one has to prove lower bounds, but proving unconditional time lower
bounds has never been easy. As a result, resorting to conditional lower bounds
has been quite popular in the classical community and is gaining momentum in
the quantum community. In this paper, by the use of the QSETH framework
[Buhrman-Patro-Speelman 2021], we are able to understand the quantum complexity
of a few natural variants of CNFSAT, such as parity-CNFSAT or counting-CNFSAT,
and also are able to comment on the non-trivial complexity of
approximate-#CNFSAT; both of these have interesting implications about the
complexity of (variations of) lattice problems, strong simulation and hitting
set problem, and more.
  In the process, we explore the QSETH framework in greater detail than was
(required and) discussed in the original paper, thus also serving as a useful
guide on how to effectively use the QSETH framework.


Category: quant-ph
Title: On combinatorial structures in linear codes
Authors: Nouédyn Baspin
Date: 2023-09-28T13:03:41Z
Abstract:   In this work we show that given a connectivity graph $G$ of a $[[n,k,d]]$
quantum code, there exists $\{K_i\}_i, K_i \subset G$, such that $\sum_i
|K_i|\in \Omega(k), \ |K_i| \in \Omega(d)$, and the $K_i$'s are
$\tilde{\Omega}( \sqrt{{k}/{n}})$-expander. If the codes are classical we show
instead that the $K_i$'s are $\tilde{\Omega}\left({{k}/{n}}\right)$-expander.
We also show converses to these bounds. In particular, we show that the BPT
bound for classical codes is tight in all Euclidean dimensions. Finally, we
prove structural theorems for graphs with no "dense" subgraphs which might be
of independent interest.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Towards surgery with good quantum LDPC codes
Authors: Alexander Cowtan
Date: 2023-09-28T12:55:05Z
Abstract:   We show that the good quantum LDPC codes of Panteleev-Kalachev \cite{PK}
allow for surgery using any logical qubits, albeit incurring an asymptotic
penalty which lowers the rate and distance scaling. We also prove that we can
satisfy 3 of the 4 conditions for performing surgery \textit{without} incurring
an asymptotic penalty. If the last condition is also satisfied then we can
perform code surgery while maintaining $k, d\in \Theta(n)$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum Spectrum of BPS Instanton States in $ 5d $ Guage Theories
Authors: Shan Hu
Date: 2023-09-28T12:42:20Z
Abstract:   We construct $ 1/2 $ BPS 1-instanton states in the Hilbert space of $ 5d $
gauge theories. The states are local with the scale size $ \rho=0 $. With the
degeneracy from the gauge orientation taken into account, the BPS spectrum
consists of an infinite number of states in the definite representations of the
gauge group and the $ (J,0) $ representation of the $ SO(4)\cong SU(2)_{L}
\times SU(2)_{R} $ rotation group. In the brane webs realization of the $ 5d $
$ \mathcal{N}=1 $ gauge theory, BPS states are string webs inside the 5-brane
webs. For a theory with the gauge group $ SU(N) $ and the Chern-Simons level $
\kappa $, we give a classification of string webs in the Coulomb branch and
show that for each web, one can always find an instanton state carrying the
same spin and the same electric charge. The action of supercharges on instanton
states gives the instanton supermultiplets. For the $ \mathcal{N} =1$ $ SU(2) $
gauge theory with $ N_{f} \leq 4$, we construct the instanton vector and hyper
multiplets, which, together with the original multiplets of the theory, furnish
the complete representation of the $ E_{N_{f}+1} $ group at UV.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Streaming quantum state purification
Authors: Andrew M. Childs, Honghao Fu, Debbie Leung, Zhi Li, Maris Ozols, Vedang Vyas
Date: 2023-09-28T12:33:09Z
Abstract:   Quantum state purification is the task of recovering a nearly pure copy of an
unknown pure quantum state using multiple noisy copies of the state. This basic
task has applications to quantum communication over noisy channels and quantum
computation with imperfect devices, but has only been studied previously for
the case of qubits. We derive an efficient purification procedure based on the
swap test for qudits of any dimension, starting with any initial error
parameter. Treating the initial error parameter and the dimension as constants,
we show that our procedure has sample complexity asymptotically optimal in the
final error parameter. Our protocol has a simple recursive structure that can
be applied when the states are provided one at a time in a streaming fashion,
requiring only a small quantum memory to implement.


Category: hep-th
Title: Emergency of black holes from wormholes
Authors: Chen-Hao Hao, Shi-Xian Sun, Long-Xing Huang, Rong Zhang, Xin Su, Yong-Qiang Wang
Date: 2023-09-28T12:28:02Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we study the spherically symmetric Dirac star model in the
presence of a phantom field, obtaining a traversable wormhole solution in
non-trivial topological spacetime. This solution exhibits asymmetry in both the
field configuration and the metric and possesses a finite ADM mass $M$ and
Noether charge $Q$. Furthermore, we find that due to the presence of a wormhole
at the center, this solution exhibits many differences from the Dirac star
under trivial spacetime. Notably, when the wormhole throat size is small, our
numerical calculations indicate the emergence of an extremely approximate black
hole solution on one side of the wormhole spacetime, a phenomenon unexplored.
At this time, the Kretschmann scalar near the throat tends to infinity,
indicating the wormhole becomes untraversable.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Integrating quantum and classical computing for multi-energy system
  optimization using Benders decomposition
Authors: Ludger Leenders, Martin Sollich, Christiane Reinert, André Bardow
Date: 2023-09-28T11:59:42Z
Abstract:   During recent years, quantum computers have received increasing attention,
primarily due to their ability to significantly increase computational
performance for specific problems. Computational performance could be improved
for mathematical optimization by quantum annealers. This special type of
quantum computer can solve quadratic unconstrained binary optimization
problems. However, multi-energy systems optimization commonly involves integer
and continuous decision variables. Due to their mixed-integer problem
structure, quantum annealers cannot be directly used for multi-energy system
optimization. To solve multi-energy system optimization problems, we present a
hybrid Benders decomposition approach combining optimization on quantum and
classical computers. In our approach, the quantum computer solves the master
problem, which involves only the integer variables from the original energy
system optimization problem. The subproblem includes the continuous variables
and is solved by a classical computer. For better performance, we apply
improvement techniques to the Benders decomposition. We test the approach on a
case study to design a cost-optimal multi-energy system. While we provide a
proof of concept that our Benders decomposition approach is applicable for the
design of multi-energy systems, the computational time is still higher than for
approaches using classical computers only. We therefore estimate the potential
improvement of our approach to be expected for larger and fault-tolerant
quantum computers.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Ehrenfest's Theorem for the Dirac Equation in Noncommutative Phase-Space
Authors: Ilyas Haouam
Date: 2023-09-28T11:50:43Z
Abstract:   In this article, we investigate Ehrenfest's theorem from the Dirac equation
in a noncommutative phase-space where we calculate the time derivative of the
position and the kinetic momentum operators for Dirac particles in interaction
with electromagnetic field and within a noncommutative setting. This allows
examining the effect of the phase-space noncommutativity on Ehrenfest's
theorem. Knowing that with both the linear Bopp-Shift and Moyal-Weyl product,
the noncommutativity is inserted.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum walk mixing is faster than classical on periodic lattices
Authors: Shyam Dhamapurkar, Xiu-Hao Deng
Date: 2023-09-28T11:23:10Z
Abstract:   This work focuses on the quantum mixing time, which is crucial for efficient
quantum sampling and algorithm performance. We extend Richter's previous
analysis of continuous time quantum walks on the periodic lattice
$\mathbb{Z}_{n_1}\times \mathbb{Z}_{n_2}\times \dots \times \mathbb{Z}_{n_d}$,
allowing for non-identical dimensions $n_i$. We present two quantum walks that
achieve faster mixing compared to classical random walks. The first is a
coordinate-wise quantum walk with a mixing time of $O\left(\left(\sum{i=1}^{d}
n_i \right) \log{(d/\epsilon)}\right)$ and $O(d \log(d/\epsilon))$
measurements. The second is a continuous-time quantum walk with
$O(\log(1/\epsilon))$ measurements, conjectured to have a mixing time of
$O\left(\sum_{i=1}^d n_i(\log(n_1))^2 \log(1/\epsilon)\right)$. Our results
demonstrate a quadratic speedup over classical mixing times on the generalized
periodic lattice. We provide analytical evidence and numerical simulations
supporting the conjectured faster mixing time. The ultimate goal is to prove
the general conjecture for quantum walks on regular graphs.


Category: hep-th
Title: Boundary terms in the Witten-Sakai-Sugimoto model at finite density
Authors: Lorenzo Bartolini, Sven Bjarke Gudnason
Date: 2023-09-28T10:43:33Z
Abstract:   We consider the Witten-Sakai-Sugimoto model in the approximation of smeared
instantons at finite density via a homogeneous Ansatz, which is known to be
discontinuous in order to be able to contain a nonvanishing baryon density. The
discontinuity at the infrared tip of the bulk spacetime gives rise to
subtleties of discarding boundary terms that are normally discarded in the
literature. We propose a reason for discarding this boundary term, by
scrutinizing the currents and topological properties of the model. Along the
way, we find a very effective and simple condition to compute the point of
thermodynamic equilibrium.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Recovering complete positivity of non-Markovian quantum dynamics with
  Choi-proximity regularization
Authors: Antonio D'Abbruzzo, Donato Farina, Vittorio Giovannetti
Date: 2023-09-28T10:29:43Z
Abstract:   A relevant problem in the theory of open quantum systems is the lack of
complete positivity of dynamical maps obtained after weak-coupling
approximations, a famous example being the Redfield master equation. A number
of approaches exist to recover well-defined evolutions under additional
Markovian assumptions, but much less is known beyond this regime. Here we
propose a numerical method to cure the complete-positivity violation issue
while preserving the non-Markovian features of an arbitrary original dynamical
map. The idea is to replace its unphysical Choi operator with its closest
physical one, mimicking recent work on quantum process tomography. We also show
that the regularized dynamics is more accurate in terms of reproducing the
exact dynamics: this allows to heuristically push the utilization of these
master equations in moderate coupling regimes, where the loss of positivity can
have relevant impact.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Gravity Mediated Entanglement between Oscillators as Quantum
  Superposition of Geometries
Authors: Ofek Bengyat, Andrea Di Biagio, Markus Aspelmeyer, Marios Christodoulou
Date: 2023-09-28T10:07:43Z
Abstract:   Protocols for observing gravity induced entanglement typically comprise the
interaction of two particles prepared either in a superposition of two discrete
paths, or in a continuously delocalized (harmonic oscillator) state of motion.
An important open question has been whether these two different approaches
allow to draw the same conclusions on the quantum nature of gravity. To answer
this question, we analyse using the path-integral approach a setup that
contains both features: a superposition of two highly delocalized center of
mass states. We conclude that the two usual protocols are of similar
epistemological relevance. In both cases the appearance of entanglement, within
linearised quantum gravity, is due to gravity being in a highly non-classical
state: a superposition of distinct geometries.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Resonance viewed as Weak Measurement
Authors: Daiki Ueda, Izumi Tsutsui
Date: 2023-09-28T09:23:46Z
Abstract:   Quantum resonance, i.e., amplification in transition probability available
under certain conditions, offers a powerful means for determining fundamental
quantities in physics, including the time duration of the second adopted in the
SI units and neutron's electric dipole moment which is directly linked to CP
violation. We revisit two of the typical examples, the Rabi resonance and the
Ramsey resonance, and show that both of these represent the weak value
amplification and that near the resonance points they share exactly the same
behavior of transition probabilities except for the measurement strength whose
difference leads to the known advantage of the Ramsey resonance in the
sensitivity. Conversely, this suggests that the weak value may be measured, for
instance, through the Ramsey resonance. In fact, we argue that previous
measurements of neutron electric dipole moment have potentially determined the
imaginary component of the weak value of the spin of neutrons with higher
precision than the conventional weak value measurement via neutron beams by
three orders of magnitude.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum Resonance viewed as Weak Measurement
Authors: Daiki Ueda, Izumi Tsutsui
Date: 2023-09-28T09:23:46Z
Abstract:   Quantum resonance, i.e., amplification in transition probability available
under certain conditions, offers a powerful means for determining fundamental
quantities in physics, including the time duration of the second adopted in the
SI units and neutron's electric dipole moment which is directly linked to CP
violation. We revisit two of the typical examples, the Rabi resonance and the
Ramsey resonance, and show that both of these represent the weak value
amplification and that near the resonance points they share exactly the same
behavior of transition probabilities except for the measurement strength whose
difference leads to the known advantage of the Ramsey resonance in the
sensitivity. Conversely, this suggests that the weak value may be measured, for
instance, through the Ramsey resonance. In fact, we argue that previous
measurements of neutron electric dipole moment have potentially determined the
imaginary component of the weak value of the spin of neutrons with higher
precision than the conventional weak value measurement via neutron beams by
three orders of magnitude.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Dilation theorem via Schrödingerisation, with applications to the
  quantum simulation of differential equations
Authors: Junpeng Hu, Shi Jin, Nana Liu, Lei Zhang
Date: 2023-09-28T08:55:43Z
Abstract:   Nagy's unitary dilation theorem in operator theory asserts the possibility of
dilating a contraction into a unitary operator. When used in quantum computing,
its practical implementation primarily relies on block-encoding techniques,
based on finite-dimensional scenarios. In this study, we delve into the
recently devised Schr\"odingerisation approach and demonstrate its viability as
an alternative dilation technique. This approach is applicable to operators in
the form of $V(t)=\exp(-At)$, which arises in wide-ranging applications,
particularly in solving linear ordinary and partial differential equations.
Importantly, the Schr\"odingerisation approach is adaptable to both finite and
infinite-dimensional cases, in both countable and uncountable domains. For
quantum systems lying in infinite dimensional Hilbert space, the dilation
involves adding a single infinite dimensional mode, and this is the
continuous-variable version of the Schr\"odingerisation procedure which makes
it suitable for analog quantum computing. Furthermore, by discretising
continuous variables, the Schr\"odingerisation method can also be effectively
employed in finite-dimensional scenarios suitable for qubit-based quantum
computing.


Category: quant-ph
Title: QonFusion -- Quantum Approaches to Gaussian Random Variables:
  Applications in Stable Diffusion and Brownian Motion
Authors: Shlomo Kashani
Date: 2023-09-28T08:51:18Z
Abstract:   In the present study, we delineate a strategy focused on non-parametric
quantum circuits for the generation of Gaussian random variables (GRVs). This
quantum-centric approach serves as a substitute for conventional pseudorandom
number generators (PRNGs), such as the \textbf{torch.rand} function in PyTorch.
The principal theme of our research is the incorporation of Quantum Random
Number Generators (QRNGs) into classical models of diffusion. Notably, our
Quantum Gaussian Random Variable Generator fulfills dual roles, facilitating
simulations in both Stable Diffusion (SD) and Brownian Motion (BM). This
diverges markedly from prevailing methods that utilize parametric quantum
circuits (PQCs), often in conjunction with variational quantum eigensolvers
(VQEs). Although conventional techniques can accurately approximate ground
states in complex systems or model elaborate probability distributions, they
require a computationally demanding optimization process to tune parameters.
Our non-parametric strategy obviates this necessity. To facilitate assimilating
our methodology into existing computational frameworks, we put forward
QonFusion, a Python library congruent with both PyTorch and PennyLane,
functioning as a bridge between classical and quantum computational paradigms.
We validate QonFusion through extensive statistical testing, including tests
which confirm the statistical equivalence of the Gaussian samples from our
quantum approach to classical counterparts within defined significance limits.
QonFusion is available at
\url{https://boltzmannentropy.github.io/qonfusion.github.io/} to reproduce all
findings here.


Category: quant-ph
Title: On finding dense sub-lattices as low energy states of a quantum
  Hamiltonian
Authors: Júlia Barberà Rodríguez, Nicolas Gama, Anand Kumar Narayanan, David Joseph
Date: 2023-09-28T08:48:38Z
Abstract:   Lattice-based cryptography has emerged as one of the most prominent
candidates for post-quantum cryptography, projected to be secure against the
imminent threat of large-scale fault-tolerant quantum computers. The Shortest
Vector Problem (SVP) is to find the shortest non-zero vector in a given
lattice. It is fundamental to lattice-based cryptography and believed to be
hard even for quantum computers. We study a natural generalization of the SVP
known as the $K$-Densest Sub-lattice Problem ($K$-DSP): to find the densest
$K$-dimensional sub-lattice of a given lattice. We formulate $K$-DSP as finding
the first excited state of a Z-basis Hamiltonian, making $K$-DSP amenable to
investigation via an array of quantum algorithms, including Grover search,
quantum Gibbs sampling, adiabatic, and Variational Quantum Algorithms. The
complexity of the algorithms depends on the basis through which the input
lattice is presented. We present a classical polynomial-time algorithm that
takes an arbitrary input basis and preprocesses it into inputs suited to
quantum algorithms. With preprocessing, we prove that $O(KN^2)$ qubits suffice
for solving $K$-DSP for $N$ dimensional input lattices. We empirically
demonstrate the performance of a Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
$K$-DSP solver for low dimensions, highlighting the influence of a good
preprocessed input basis. We then discuss the hardness of $K$-DSP in relation
to the SVP, to see if there is reason to build post-quantum cryptography on
$K$-DSP. We devise a quantum algorithm that solves $K$-DSP with run-time
exponent $(5KN\log{N})/2$. Therefore, for fixed $K$, $K$-DSP is no more than
polynomially harder than the SVP.


Category: hep-th
Title: Notes on the degenerate integrability of reduced systems obtained from
  the master systems of free motion on cotangent bundles of compact Lie groups
Authors: L. Feher
Date: 2023-09-28T08:37:13Z
Abstract:   The reduction of the `master system' of free motion on the cotangent bundle
$T^*G$ of a compact, connected and simply connected, semisimple Lie group is
considered using the conjugation action of $G$. It is proved that the
restriction of the reduced system to the smooth component of the quotient space
$T^*G/G$, given by the principal orbit type, inherits the degenerate
integrability of the master system. The proof can be generalized easily to
other interesting examples of Hamiltonian reduction.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Limitations of local update recovery in stabilizer-GKP codes: a quantum
  optimal transport approach
Authors: Robert König, Cambyse Rouzé
Date: 2023-09-28T08:29:52Z
Abstract:   Local update recovery seeks to maintain quantum information by applying local
correction maps alternating with and compensating for the action of noise.
Motivated by recent constructions based on quantum LDPC codes in the
finite-dimensional setting, we establish an analytic upper bound on the
fault-tolerance threshold for concatenated GKP-stabilizer codes with local
update recovery. Our bound applies to noise channels that are tensor products
of one-mode beamsplitters with arbitrary environment states, capturing, in
particular, photon loss occurring independently in each mode. It shows that for
loss rates above a threshold given explicitly as a function of the locality of
the recovery maps, encoded information is lost at an exponential rate. This
extends an early result by Razborov from discrete to continuous variable (CV)
quantum systems.
  To prove our result, we study a metric on bosonic states akin to the
Wasserstein distance between two CV density functions, which we call the
bosonic Wasserstein distance. It can be thought of as a CV extension of a
quantum Wasserstein distance of order 1 recently introduced by De Palma et al.
in the context of qudit systems, in the sense that it captures the notion of
locality in a CV setting. We establish several basic properties, including a
relation to the trace distance and diameter bounds for states with finite
average photon number. We then study its contraction properties under quantum
channels, including tensorization, locality and strict contraction under
beamsplitter-type noise channels. Due to the simplicity of its formulation, and
the established wide applicability of its finite-dimensional counterpart, we
believe that the bosonic Wasserstein distance will become a versatile tool in
the study of CV quantum systems.


Category: hep-th
Title: Basis transformation properties of anomalous dimensions for hard
  exclusive processes
Authors: S. Van Thurenhout
Date: 2023-09-28T08:20:55Z
Abstract:   When considering the renormalization of composite operators for the
description of hard exclusive scattering processes, two types of operator basis
called the derivative basis and the Gegenbauer basis are often used in the
literature. In this work we set up the explicit similarity transformations
between these two bases, both for quark and gluon operators. This way, one can
use the properties of both bases to their advantage in the computation of the
operator anomalous dimensions, which describe the scale dependence of
non-perturbative non-forward parton distributions. We provide several
applications of our framework. As an application of the gluon transformation
formula, we compute the one-loop non-forward purely gluonic anomalous dimension
matrix. For the rest of the applications we focus on the transformation formula
of the quark operator. We derive the Gegenbauer anomalous dimensions, in the
limit of a large number of quark flavors $n_f$, to all orders in the strong
coupling $\alpha_s$, extending the computation previously performed in the
derivative basis. Next a numeric calculation of the two-loop anomalous
dimensions in the derivative basis beyond the leading-color limit is presented.
Finally, we discuss a novel way of checking existing computations of the
conformal anomaly based on the leading-color anomalous dimensions in the
derivative basis.


Category: hep-th
Title: Irreversible vierbein postulate: Emergence of spacetime from quantum
  phase transition
Authors: Yadikaer Maitiniyazi, Shinya Matsuzaki, Kin-ya Oda, Masatoshi Yamada
Date: 2023-09-28T08:10:45Z
Abstract:   We formulate a model for quantum gravity based on the local-Lorentz symmetry
and general invariance. A key idea is the irreversible vierbein postulate that
a tree-level action for the model at a certain energy scale does not contain
inverse vierbein. Under this postulate, only the spinor becomes a dynamical
field and no gravitational background field is not introduced in the tree-level
action. In this paper, after explaining the transformation rules of the
local-Lorentz and general-coordinate transformations in detail, a tree-level
action is defined. We show that fermionic fluctuations induce a non-vanishing
gravitational background field.


Category: hep-th
Title: Anomalous function of a Lorentz-violating QED effective action and the
  relation between compact bulk scalar propagator and path integral duality
Authors: Huangcheng Yin
Date: 2023-09-28T07:59:33Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we consider a compact five dimensional spacetime with the
structure $\mathcal{M}^{1,3}\times S^{1}$. Generally speaking, motion on such a
structure will break Lorentz invariance, allowing for causal bulk signals to
propagate superluminally. Based on recent articles, we calculate the anomalous
function of a gauge invariant but Lorentz-violating term in the $4D$ QED
effective action by using path integral. Finally, we find that the compact bulk
scalar propagator and path integral duality are consistent, this result brings
a new perspective: the behavior of breaking Lorentz invariance caused by
dimensional compactness can be seen as path integral duality.


Category: hep-th
Title: Extended BMT equations and the anomalous magnetic moment
Authors: Felipe A. Asenjo, Benjamin Koch
Date: 2023-09-28T07:44:23Z
Abstract:   We propose a generalized form of the Thomas-Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi
equations. These are first-order in both electric and magnetic fields and
retain the conventional conserved quantities and constraints. Within this novel
phenomenological framework, we delve into an archetypal measurement scenario.
Specifically, we scrutinize the contributions to the standard definition of the
anomalous magnetic moment observable, highlighting each new correction term.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Theory of Non-Hermitian Fermionic Superfluidity on a Honeycomb Lattice:
  Interplay between Exceptional Manifolds and Van Hove Singularity
Authors: Soma Takemori, Kazuki Yamamoto, Akihisa Koga
Date: 2023-09-28T06:21:55Z
Abstract:   We study the non-Hermitian fermionic superfluidity subject to dissipation of
Cooper pairs on a honeycomb lattice, for which we analyze the attractive
Hubbard model with a complex-valued interaction. Remarkably, we demonstrate the
emergence of the dissipation-induced superfluid phase that is anomalously
enlarged by a cusp on the phase boundary. We find that this unconventional
phase transition originates from the interplay between exceptional lines and
van Hove singularity, which has no counterpart in equilibrium. Moreover, we
demonstrate that the infinitesimal dissipation induces the nontrivial
superfluid solution at the critical point. Our results can be tested in
ultracold atoms with photoassociation techniques by postselcting special
measurement outcomes with the use of quantum-gas microscopy and pave the way
for understanding non-Hermitian many-body physics triggered by exceptional
manifolds in open quantum systems.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Semi-device-independent certification of quantum non-Markovianity using
  sequential Random Access Codes
Authors: Abhinash Kumar Roy, Varun Srivastava, Soumik Mahanti, Christina Giarmatzi, Alexei Gilchrist
Date: 2023-09-28T06:21:24Z
Abstract:   The characterization of multi-time correlations in open quantum systems is of
fundamental importance. In this work, we investigate multi-time processes using
the process matrix formalism and show that the presence of a quantum
non-Markovian environment plays a significant role in enhancing the
communication capacity in sequential prepare-transform-measure Quantum Random
Access Codes (QRAC). The correlated environment enables a quantum advantage to
multiple parties, even with projective measurements. In particular, we show
that the Markovian and classical non-Markovian processes, i.e. quantum
processes with classical feedback from the environment, do not yield sequential
quantum advantage. In contrast, it is possible to achieve an advantage in the
presence of a quantum non-Markovian environment. Therefore this approach allows
a semi-device-independent certification of quantum non-Markovianity. As opposed
to entanglement-detection criteria which require the knowledge of the complete
process, this method allows to certify the presence of a quantum non-Markovian
environment from the observed measurement statistics. Moreover, quantum memory
ameliorates the unambiguous certifiable region of unsharp instruments in a
semi-device-independent manner.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Tight conic approximation of testing regions for quantum statistical
  models and measurements
Authors: Michele Dall'Arno, Francesco Buscemi
Date: 2023-09-28T04:02:55Z
Abstract:   Quantum statistical models (i.e., families of normalized density matrices)
and quantum measurements (i.e., positive operator-valued measures) can be
regarded as linear maps: the former, mapping the space of effects to the space
of probability distributions; the latter, mapping the space of states to the
space of probability distributions. The images of such linear maps are called
the testing regions of the corresponding model or measurement. Testing regions
are notoriously impractical to treat analytically in the quantum case. Our
first result is to provide an implicit outer approximation of the testing
region of any given quantum statistical model or measurement in any finite
dimension: namely, a region in probability space that contains the desired
image, but is defined implicitly, using a formula that depends only on the
given model or measurement. The outer approximation that we construct is
minimal among all such outer approximations, and close, in the sense that it
becomes the maximal inner approximation up to a constant scaling factor.
Finally, we apply our approximation formulas to characterize, in a semi-device
independent way, the ability to transform one quantum statistical model or
measurement into another.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Braiding topology of symmetry-protected degeneracy points in
  non-Hermitian systems
Authors: Jia-Zheng Li, Kai Bai, Cheng Guo, Tian-Rui Liu, Liang Fang, Duanduan Wan, Meng Xiao
Date: 2023-09-28T03:57:40Z
Abstract:   Degeneracy points in non-Hermitian systems are of great interest. While a
framework exists for understanding their behavior in the absence of symmetry,
it does not apply to symmetry-protected degeneracy points with reduced
codimension. In this work, we investigate the braiding topology and non-abelian
conservation rule of these symmetry-protected degenerate points. We find that,
contrary to simple annihilation, pairwise created symmetry-protected degeneracy
points merge into a higher order degeneracy point, which goes beyond the
abelian picture. We verify these findings using a model Hamiltonian and
full-wave simulations in an electric circuit system.


Category: hep-th
Title: Nonrelativistic expansion of type IIA NS5 brane
Authors: Dibakar Roychowdhury
Date: 2023-09-28T03:52:54Z
Abstract:   We carry out nonrelativistic expansion for NS5 brane based on a codimension
two foliation of type IIA supergravity background. We simultaneously expand the
world-volume fields in an appropriate $ 1/c^2 $ expansion together with the
background fluxes. When put together, the resulting procedure yields a finite
world-volume action for nonrelativistic NS5 brane that is coupled to String
Newton-Cartan background.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Finite-Key Analysis for Coherent-One-Way Quantum Key Distribution
Authors: Ming-Yang Li, Xiao-Yu Cao, Yuan-Mei Xie, Hua-Lei Yin, Zeng-Bing Chen
Date: 2023-09-28T03:32:06Z
Abstract:   Coherent-one-way (COW) quantum key distribution (QKD) is a significant
communication protocol that has been implemented experimentally and deployed in
practical products due to its simple equipment requirements. However, existing
security analyses of COW-QKD either provide a short transmission distance or
lack immunity against coherent attacks in the finite-key regime. In this study,
we present a tight finite-key security analysis within the universally
composable framework for a new variant of COW-QKD, which has been proven to
extend the secure transmission distance in the asymptotic case. We combine the
Quantum Leftover Hash Lemma and entropic uncertainty relation to derive the key
rate formula. When estimating statistical parameters, we use the recently
proposed Kato's inequality to ensure security against coherent attacks and
achieve a higher key rate. Our work confirms the security and feasibility of
COW-QKD for practical application and lays the foundation for further
theoretical study and experimental implementation.


Category: hep-th
Title: Scalar field inflation driven by a modification of the Heisenberg
  algebra
Authors: H. Garcia-Compean, D. Mata-Pacheco
Date: 2023-09-28T02:18:16Z
Abstract:   We study the modifications induced on scalar field inflation produced by
considering a general modification of the Heisenberg algebra. We proceed by
modifying the Poisson brackets on the classical theory whenever the
corresponding quantum commutator is modified. We do not restrict ourselves to a
specific form for such modification, instead we constrain the functions
involved by the cosmological behaviour of interest. We present whenever
possible the way in which inflation can be realized approximately via three
slow roll Hubble parameters that depend on the standard slow roll parameters in
a very different form than in the usual case and that can be less restrictive.
Furthermore we find a general analytical solution describing an expanding
universe with constant Hubble parameter that generalizes the standard
cosmological constant case by restricting the form of the modification of the
Heisenberg algebra. It is found that even if such modification can be neglected
in some limit and the cosmological constant is set to zero in that limit, the
exponential expansion is present when the modification is important. Thus an
appropriate modification of the Heisenberg algebra is sufficient to produce an
exponentially expanding universe without the need of any other source.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Geometrically Local Quantum and Classical Codes from Subdivision
Authors: Ting-Chun Lin, Adam Wills, Min-Hsiu Hsieh
Date: 2023-09-28T02:12:38Z
Abstract:   A geometrically local quantum code is an error correcting code situated
within $\mathbb{R}^D$, where the checks only act on qubits within a fixed
spatial distance. The main question is: What is the optimal dimension and
distance for a geometrically local code? This question was recently answered by
Portnoy which constructed codes with optimal dimension and distance up to
polylogs. This paper extends Portnoy's work by constructing a code which
additionally has an optimal energy barrier up to polylogs. The key ingredient
is a simpler code construction obtained by subdividing the balanced product
codes. We also discuss applications to classical codes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Relevant long-range interaction of the entanglement Hamiltonian emerges
  from a short-range system
Authors: Chuhao Li, Rui-Zhen Huang, Yi-Ming Ding, Zi Yang Meng, Yan-Cheng Wang, Zheng Yan
Date: 2023-09-28T01:09:12Z
Abstract:   Beyond the Li-Haldane conjecture, we find the entanglement Hamiltonian (EH)
is actually not closely similar to the original Hamiltonian on the virtual
edge. Unexpectedly, the EH has some relevant long-range interacting terms which
hugely affect the physics. Without loss of generality, we study a spin-1/2
Heisenberg bilayer to obtain the entanglement information between the two
layers. Although the entanglement spectrum carrying Goldstone mode seems like a
Heisenberg model on a single layer which is consistent with Li-Haldane
conjecture, we demonstrate there actually is a finite temperature phase
transition for the EH. The results violate the Mermin-Wagner theorem which
means there should be relevant long-range terms in the EH. It reveals that the
Li-Haldane conjecture ignores necessary corrections for the EH which may lead
totally different physics.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Temporal evolution of a driven optomechanical system in the strong
  coupling regime
Authors: L. Medina-Dozal, J. Récamier, H. M. Moya-Cessa, F. Soto-Eguibar, R. Román-Ancheyta, I. Ramos-Prieto, A. R. Urzúa
Date: 2023-09-28T00:52:14Z
Abstract:   We obtain a time-evolution operator for a forced optomechanical quantum
system using Lie algebraic methods when the normalized coupling between the
electromagnetic field and a mechanical oscillator, $G/\omega_m$, is not
negligible compared to one. Due to the forcing term, the interaction picture
Hamiltonian contains the number operator in the exponents, and in order to deal
with it, we approximate these exponentials by their average values taken
between initial coherent states. Our approximation is justified when we compare
our results with the numerical solution of the number of photons, phonons,
Mandel parameter, and the Wigner function, showing an excellent agreement.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Efficient Computation of the Quantum Rate-Distortion Function
Authors: Kerry He, James Saunderson, Hamza Fawzi
Date: 2023-09-28T00:46:53Z
Abstract:   The quantum rate-distortion function plays a fundamental role in quantum
information theory, however there is currently no practical algorithm which can
efficiently compute this function to high accuracy for moderate channel
dimensions. In this paper, we show how symmetry reduction can significantly
simplify common instances of the entanglement-assisted quantum rate-distortion
problems, allowing for more efficient computation regardless of the numerical
algorithm being used. For some of these problem instances, symmetry reduction
allows us to derive closed-form expressions for the quantum rate-distortion
function. Additionally, we propose an inexact variant of the mirror descent
algorithm to compute the quantum rate-distortion function with provable
sublinear convergence rates. We show how this mirror descent algorithm is
related to Blahut-Arimoto and expectation-maximization methods previously used
to solve similar problems in information theory. Using these techniques, we
present the first numerical experiments to compute a multi-qubit quantum
rate-distortion function, and show that our proposed algorithm solves faster
and to higher accuracy when compared to existing methods.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Classical-trajectory model for ionizing proton-ammonia molecule
  collisions: the role of multiple ionization
Authors: Alba Jorge, Marko Horbatsch, Tom Kirchner
Date: 2023-09-28T00:45:20Z
Abstract:   We use an independent electron model with semi-classical approximation to
electron dynamics to investigate differential cross sections for electron
emission in fast collisions of protons with ammonia molecules. An effective
potential model for the electronic orbitals is introduced, and utilized in the
context of the classical-trajectory Monte Carlo (CTMC) approach for
single-electron dynamics. Cross sections differential in electron emission
angle and energy are compared with experimental data. Compared to previous
scattering-theory based quantum-mechanical results the time-dependent
semi-classical CTMC approach provides results of similar quality for
intermediate and high ionized electron energies. We find some discrepancies in
the total cross sections for $q$-fold ionization between the present model and
independent-atom-model calculations. The double ionization cross sections are
considerably larger than recent experimental data which are derived from
coincidence counting of charged fragments. The calculated triple ionization
cross sections exceed the experimental coincidence data for $q=3$ by several
orders of magnitude at intermediate energies.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Measurement-based Lorentz-covariant Bohmian trajectories of interacting
  photons
Authors: Joshua Foo, Austin P. Lund, Timothy C. Ralph
Date: 2023-09-27T20:40:07Z
Abstract:   In a recent article [Foo et. al., Nature Comms. 13, 2 (2022)], we devised a
method of constructing the Lorentz-covariant Bohmian trajectories of single
photons via weak measurements of the photon's momentum and energy. However,
whether such a framework can consistently describe multiparticle interactions
remains to be seen. Here, we present a nontrivial generalisation of our
framework to describe the relativistic Bohmian trajectories of two interacting
photons exhibiting nonclassical interference due to their indistiguishability.
We begin by deriving the average velocity fields of the indistinguishable
photons using a conditional weak measurement protocol, with detectors that are
agnostic to the identity of the respective photons. We demonstrate a direct
correspondence between the operationally-derived trajectories with those
obtained using a position- and time-symmetrised multiparticle Klein-Gordon
wavefunction, whose dynamics are manifestly Lorentz-covariant. We propose a
spacetime metric that depends nonlocally on the positions of both particles as
a curvature based interpretation of the resulting trajectories. Contrary to
prior expectations, our results demonstrate a consistent trajectory-based
interpretation of relativistic multiparticle interactions in quantum theory.


Category: hep-th
Title: Measurement-based Lorentz-covariant Bohmian trajectories of interacting
  photons
Authors: Joshua Foo, Austin P. Lund, Timothy C. Ralph
Date: 2023-09-27T20:40:07Z
Abstract:   In a recent article [Foo et. al., Nature Comms. 13, 2 (2022)], we devised a
method of constructing the Lorentz-covariant Bohmian trajectories of single
photons via weak measurements of the photon's momentum and energy. However,
whether such a framework can consistently describe multiparticle interactions
remains to be seen. Here, we present a nontrivial generalisation of our
framework to describe the relativistic Bohmian trajectories of two interacting
photons exhibiting nonclassical interference due to their indistiguishability.
We begin by deriving the average velocity fields of the indistinguishable
photons using a conditional weak measurement protocol, with detectors that are
agnostic to the identity of the respective photons. We demonstrate a direct
correspondence between the operationally-derived trajectories with those
obtained using a position- and time-symmetrised multiparticle Klein-Gordon
wavefunction, whose dynamics are manifestly Lorentz-covariant. We propose a
spacetime metric that depends nonlocally on the positions of both particles as
a curvature based interpretation of the resulting trajectories. Contrary to
prior expectations, our results demonstrate a consistent trajectory-based
interpretation of relativistic multiparticle interactions in quantum theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Scale-invariant critical dynamics at eigenstate transitions
Authors: Miroslav Hopjan, Lev Vidmar
Date: 2023-09-27T20:35:58Z
Abstract:   The notion of scale invariant dynamics is well established at late times in
quantum chaotic systems, as illustrated by the emergence of a ramp in the
spectral form factor (SFF). Building on the results of the preceding Letter
[Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 060404 (2023)], we explore features of scale invariant
dynamics of survival probability and SFF at criticality, i.e., at eigenstate
transitions from quantum chaos to localization. We show that, in contrast to
the quantum chaotic regime, the quantum dynamics at criticality do not only
exhibit scale invariance at late times, but also at much shorter times that we
refer to as mid-time dynamics. Our results apply to both quadratic and
interacting models. Specifically, we study Anderson models in dimensions three
to five and power-law random banded matrices for the former, and the quantum
sun model and the ultrametric model for the latter, as well as the
Rosenzweig-Porter model.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Universal determination of comagnetometer response to spin couplings
Authors: Mikhail Padniuk, Emmanuel Klinger, Grzegorz Lukasiewicz, Daniel Gavilan-Martin, Tianhao Liu, Szymon Pustelny, Derek F. Jackson Kimball, Dmitry Budker, Arne Wickenbrock
Date: 2023-09-27T20:31:47Z
Abstract:   We propose and demonstrate a general method to calibrate the
frequency-dependent response of self-compensating noble-gas-alkali-metal
comagnetometers to arbitrary spin perturbations. This includes magnetic and
nonmagnetic perturbations like rotations and exotic spin interactions. The
method is based on a fit of the magnetic field response to an analytical model.
The frequency-dependent response of the comagnetometer to arbitrary spin
perturbations can be inferred using the fit parameters. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this method by comparing the inferred rotation response to an
experimental measurement of the rotation response. Our results show that
experiments relying on zero-frequency calibration of the comagnetometer
response can over- or under-estimate the comagnetometer sensitivity by orders
of magnitude over a wide frequency range. Moreover, this discrepancy
accumulates over time as operational parameters tend to drift during
comagnetometer operation. The demonstrated calibration protocol enables
accurate prediction and control of comagnetometer sensitivity to, for example,
ultralight bosonic dark-matter fields coupling to electron or nuclear spins as
well as accurate monitoring and control of the relevant system parameters.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Multi-mode Cavity Centric Architectures for Quantum Simulation
Authors: Samuel Stein, Fei Hua, Chenxu Liu, Charles Guinn, James Ang, Eddy Zhang, Srivatsan Chakram, Yufei Ding, Ang Li
Date: 2023-09-27T20:16:44Z
Abstract:   Near-term quantum computing technologies grapple with huge complexity
overheads, hindering their ability to induce algorithms, necessitating
engineering and scientific innovations. One class of problems of interest is
Quantum Simulation, whereby quantum systems are simulated using a quantum
computer. However, current devices are yet to surpass classical tensor network
techniques. For problems of interest, where classical simulation techniques
fail, large degrees of entanglement are required. Another challenge of
implementing quantum simulation problems is that qubits sit idle whilst
alternating simulation terms are implemented, exposing the system to
decoherence. In the near term, 2D planar superconducting lattices of
circuit-QED elements such as the transmon continue to draw substantial
attention, but they are hindered by their nearest neighbor topology and
relatively short lifespan, two problems that are problematic for quantum
simulation. One technology of particular interest is the multi-mode
superconducting resonator capable of storing multiple qubits in one device. We
observe that these cavities have a natural virtual topology that aligns
particularly well with quantum simulation problems, and exhibit much longer
lifespans in comparison to other planar superconducting hardware. In this paper
we present MUCIC, we discuss the simple integration of these devices into the
current landscape and their implications to quantum simulation, motivated by
their alignment to the quantum simulation problem, and potential as a quantum
memory candidate. We report the development of MUCICs transpiler, leading to
reductions of up to 82% in quantum simulation circuit depths. Additionally, our
investigation demonstrates improvements of up to 19.4% in converged results
from Variational Quantum Algorithms.


Category: hep-th
Title: An excursion into the string spectrum
Authors: Chrysoula Markou, Evgeny Skvortsov
Date: 2023-09-27T20:10:42Z
Abstract:   We propose a covariant technique to excavate physical bosonic string states
by entire trajectories rather than individually. The approach is based on Howe
duality: the string's spacetime Lorentz algebra commutes with a certain
inductive limit of $sp(\bullet)$, with the Virasoro constraints forming a
subalgebra of the Howe dual algebra $sp(\bullet)$. There are then infinitely
many simple trajectories of states, which are lowest-weight representations of
$sp(\bullet)$ and hence of the Virasoro algebra. Deeper trajectories are
recurrences of the simple ones and can be probed by suitable
trajectory-shifting operators built out of the Howe dual algebra generators. We
illustrate the formalism with a number of subleading trajectories and compute a
sample of tree-level amplitudes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Perturbative nonlinear feedback forces for optical levitation
  experiments
Authors: Oscar Kremer, Daniel Tandeitnik, Rafael Mufato, Igor Califrer, Breno Calderoni, Felipe Calliari, Bruno Melo, Guilherme Temporão, Thiago Guerreiro
Date: 2023-09-27T19:50:12Z
Abstract:   Feedback control can be used to generate well-determined nonlinear effective
potentials in an optical trap, a goal whose applications may range from
non-equilibrium thermodynamics to the generation of non-Gaussian states of
mechanical motion. Here, we investigate the action of an effective
feedback-generated quartic potential on a levitated nanoparticle within the
perturbation regime. The effects of feedback delay are discussed and
predictions from the perturbation theory of a Brownian particle subjected to a
quartic anharmonicity are experimentally verified.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Optical tuning of the diamond Fermi level measured by correlated
  scanning probe microscopy and quantum defect spectroscopy
Authors: Christian Pederson, Rajiv Giridharagopal, Fang Zhao, Scott T. Dunham, Yevgeny Raitses, David S. Ginger, Kai-Mei C. Fu
Date: 2023-09-27T19:41:23Z
Abstract:   Quantum technologies based on quantum point defects in crystals require
control over the defect charge state. Here we tune the charge state of shallow
nitrogen-vacancy and silicon-vacancy centers by locally oxidizing a
hydrogenated surface with moderate optical excitation and simultaneous spectral
monitoring. The loss of conductivity and change in work function due to
oxidation are measured in atmosphere using conductive atomic force microscopy
(C-AFM) and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). We correlate these scanning
probe measurements with optical spectroscopy of the nitrogen-vacancy and
silicon-vacancy centers created via implantation and annealing 15-25 nm beneath
the diamond surface. The observed charge state of the defects as a function of
optical exposure demonstrates that laser oxidation provides a way to precisely
tune the Fermi level over a range of at least 2.00 eV. We also observe a
significantly larger oxidation rate for implanted surfaces compared to
unimplanted surfaces under ambient conditions. Combined with knowledge of the
electron affinity of a surface, these results suggest KPFM is a powerful,
high-spatial resolution technique to advance surface Fermi level engineering
for charge stabilization of quantum defects.


Category: hep-th
Title: Review on $f(Q)$ Gravity
Authors: Lavinia Heisenberg
Date: 2023-09-27T19:16:19Z
Abstract:   Recent years have witnessed a rise in interest in the geometrical trinity of
General Relativity and its extensions. This interest has been fuelled by novel
insights into the nature of gravity, the possibility to address computational
and conceptual questions -- such as the determination of black hole entropy or
the definition of gravitational energy-momentum -- from a new perspective. In
particular, $f(Q)$ gravity has also inspired numerous works on black holes,
wormholes, and cosmology. In the latter case, $f(Q)$ models have the potential
to elucidate phenomena in both early and late-time cosmology without
necessitating the inclusion of dark energy, the inflaton field, or dark matter.
Particularly noteworthy is the role of $f(Q)$ theories in addressing
cosmological tensions, presenting exciting possibilities for reshaping our
understanding of gravity and its manifestations in cosmology. The emergence of
intriguing new black hole solutions and the potential existence of wormhole
solutions suggest the presence of novel physics within the realm of strong
gravity. These phenomena have become increasingly measurable only in recent
times, opening up exciting avenues for further exploration and discovery. This
review is tailored to students and researchers alike. It offers a
self-contained and pedagogical introduction to metric-affine geometry--The
mathematical foundation and indispensable tool upon which the geometrical
trinity of General Relativity as well as its various extensions are built.


Category: hep-th
Title: All orders factorization and the Coulomb problem
Authors: Richard J. Hill, Ryan Plestid
Date: 2023-09-27T18:10:38Z
Abstract:   In the limit of large nuclear charge, $Z\gg 1$, or small lepton velocity,
$\beta \ll 1$, Coulomb corrections to nuclear beta decay and related processes
are enhanced as $Z\alpha/\beta$ and become large or even non-perturbative (with
$\alpha$ the QED fine structure constant). We provide a constructive
demonstration of factorization to all orders in perturbation theory for these
processes and compute the all-orders hard and soft functions appearing in the
factorization formula. We clarify the relationship between effective field
theory amplitudes and historical treatments of beta decay in terms of a Fermi
function.


Category: hep-th
Title: Elastic Scattering of Cosmological Gravitational Wave Backgrounds:
  Primordial Black Holes and Stellar Objects
Authors: Marcell Howard, Morgane König
Date: 2023-09-27T18:02:43Z
Abstract:   Primordial black holes (PBHs) are plausible dark matter candidates that
formed from the gravitational collapse of primordial density fluctuations.
Current observational constraints allow asteroid-mass PBHs to account for all
of the cosmological dark matter. We show that elastic scattering of a
cosmological gravitational wave background, these black holes generate spectral
distortions on the background of 0.3% for cosmologically relevant frequencies.
Scattering from stellar objects induce much smaller distortions. Detectability
of this signal depends on our ultimate understanding of the unperturbed
background spectrum.


Category: hep-th
Title: $p$-form electrodynamics as edge modes of a topological field theory
Authors: Oscar Fuentealba, Ricardo Troncoso
Date: 2023-09-27T18:01:47Z
Abstract:   $p$-form electrodynamics in $d\geq 2$ dimensions is shown to emerge as the
edge modes of a topological field theory with a precise set of boundary
conditions, through the Hamiltonian reduction of its action. Electric and
magnetic charges correspond to Noether ones in the topological field theory.
For chiral $p$-forms, the topological action can be consistently truncated, so
that the Henneaux-Teitelboim action is recovered from a pure Chern-Simons
theory, with a manifestly covariant stress-energy tensor at the boundary.
Topologically massive $p$-form electrodynamics as well as axion couplings are
also shown to be described through this mechanism by considering suitable
(self-)interaction terms in the topological theory.


Category: hep-th
Title: Capping the positivity cone: dimension-8 Higgs operators in the SMEFT
Authors: Qing Chen, Ken Mimasu, Tong Arthur Wu, Guo-Dong Zhang, Shuang-Yong Zhou
Date: 2023-09-27T18:01:01Z
Abstract:   SMEFT Wilson coefficients are subject to various positivity bounds in order
to be consistent with the fundamental principles of S-matrix. Previous bounds
on dimension-8 SMEFT operators have been obtained using the positivity part of
UV partial wave unitarity and form a (projective) convex cone. We derive a set
of linear UV unitarity conditions that go beyond positivity and are easy to
implement in an optimization scheme with dispersion relations in a multi-field
EFT. Using Higgs scattering as an example, we demonstrate how to obtain closed
bounds in the space of the three relevant dimension-8 coefficients, making use
of the UV unitarity conditions as well as so-called null constraints that arise
from full crossing symmetry. Specifically, we show that they are bounded by
inequalities schematically going like $C<O\left((4\pi)^2\right)$. We compare
the newly obtained upper bounds with the traditional perturbative unitarity
bounds from within the EFT, and discuss some phenomenological implications of
the two-sided positivity bounds in the context of experimental probes of Vector
Boson Scattering.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum computer-enabled receivers for optical communication
Authors: John Crossman, Spencer Dimitroff, Lukasz Cincio, Mohan Sarovar
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:05Z
Abstract:   Optical communication is the standard for high-bandwidth information transfer
in today's digital age. The increasing demand for bandwidth has led to the
maturation of coherent transceivers that use phase- and amplitude-modulated
optical signals to encode more bits of information per transmitted pulse. Such
encoding schemes achieve higher information density, but also require more
complicated receivers to discriminate the signaling states. In fact, achieving
the ultimate limit of optical communication capacity, especially in the low
light regime, requires coherent joint detection of multiple pulses. Despite
their superiority, such joint detection receivers are not in widespread use
because of the difficulty of constructing them in the optical domain. In this
work we describe how optomechanical transduction of phase information from
coherent optical pulses to superconducting qubit states followed by the
execution of trained short-depth variational quantum circuits can perform joint
detection of communication codewords with error probabilities that surpass all
classical, individual pulse detection receivers. Importantly, we utilize a
model of optomechanical transduction that captures non-idealities such as
thermal noise and loss in order to understand the transduction performance
necessary to achieve a quantum advantage with such a scheme. We also execute
the trained variational circuits on an IBM-Q device with the modeled transduced
states as input to demonstrate that a quantum advantage is possible even with
current levels of quantum computing hardware noise.


Category: hep-th
Title: All Loop Scattering as a Counting Problem
Authors: N. Arkani-Hamed, H. Frost, G. Salvatori, P-G. Plamondon, H. Thomas
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:04Z
Abstract:   This is the first in a series of papers presenting a new understanding of
scattering amplitudes based on fundamentally combinatorial ideas in the
kinematic space of the scattering data. We study the simplest theory of colored
scalar particles with cubic interactions, at all loop orders and to all orders
in the topological 't Hooft expansion. We find a novel formula for
loop-integrated amplitudes, with no trace of the conventional sum over Feynman
diagrams, but instead determined by a beautifully simple counting problem
attached to any order of the topological expansion. These results represent a
significant step forward in the decade-long quest to formulate the fundamental
physics of the real world in a radically new language, where the rules of
spacetime and quantum mechanics, as reflected in the principles of locality and
unitarity, are seen to emerge from deeper mathematical structures.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Pumping Chirality in Three Dimensions
Authors: Lukasz Fidkowski, Matthew B. Hastings
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   Using bosonization, which maps fermions coupled to a ${\mathbb{Z}}_2$ gauge
field to a qubit system, we give a simple form for the non-trivial 3-fermion
quantum cellular automaton (QCA) as a unitary operator realizing a phase
depending on the framing of flux loops, building off work by Shirley et al. We
relate this framing dependent phase to a pump of $8$ copies of a $p+ip$ state
through the system. We give a resolution of an apparent paradox, namely that
the pump is a shallow depth circuit (albeit with tails), while the QCA is
nontrivial. We discuss also the pump of fewer copies of a $p+ip$ state, and
describe its action on topologically degenerate ground states. One consequence
of our results is that a pump of $n$ $p+ip$ states generated by a free Fermi
evolution is a free fermion unitary characterized by a non-trivial winding
number $n$ as a map from the third homotopy group of the Brilliouin Zone
$3$-torus to that of $SU(N_ b)$, where $N_b$ is the number of bands. Using our
simplified form of the QCA, we give higher dimensional generalizations that we
conjecture are also nontrivial QCAs, and we discuss the relation to
Chern-Simons theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Holographic Weak Measurement
Authors: Xinyu Sun, Shao-Kai Jian
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we study a holographic description of weak measurements in
conformal field theories (CFTs). Weak measurements can be viewed as a soft
projection that interpolates between an identity operator and a projection
operator, and can induce an effective central charge distinct from the
unmeasured CFT. We model the weak measurement by an interface brane, separating
different geometries dual to the post-measurement state and the unmeasured CFT,
respectively. In an infinite system, the weak measurement is related to ICFT
via a spacetime rotation. We find that the holographic entanglement entropy
with twist operators located on the defect is consistent in both calculations
for ICFT and weak measurements. We additionally calculate the boundary entropy
via holographic entanglement as well as partition function. In a finite system,
the weak measurement can lead to a rich phase diagram: for marginal
measurements the emergent brane separates two AdS geometries, while for
irrelevant measurements the post-measurement geometry features an AdS spacetime
and a black hole spacetime that are separated by the brane. Although the
measurement is irrelevant in the later phase, the post-measurement geometry can
realize a Python's lunch.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Generalized Black Hole Entropy is von Neumann Entropy
Authors: Jonah Kudler-Flam, Samuel Leutheusser, Gautam Satishchandran
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   It was recently shown that the von Neumann algebras of observables dressed to
the mass of a Schwarzschild-AdS black hole or an observer in de Sitter are Type
II, and thus admit well-defined traces. The von Neumann entropies of
"semi-classical" states were found to be generalized entropies. However, these
arguments relied on the existence of an equilibrium (KMS) state and thus do not
apply to, e.g., black holes formed from gravitational collapse, Kerr black
holes, or black holes in asymptotically de Sitter space. In this paper, we
present a general framework for obtaining the algebra of dressed observables
for linear fields on any spacetime with a Killing horizon. We prove, assuming
the existence of a stationary (but not necessarily KMS) state and suitable
decay of solutions, a structure theorem that the algebra of dressed observables
always contains a Type II factor "localized" on the horizon. These assumptions
have been rigorously proven in most cases of interest. Applied to the algebra
in the exterior of an asymptotically flat Kerr black hole, where the fields are
dressed to the black hole mass and angular momentum, we find a product of a
Type II$_{\infty}$ algebra on the horizon and a Type I$_{\infty}$ algebra at
past null infinity. In Schwarzschild-de Sitter, despite the fact that we
introduce an observer, the quantum field observables are dressed to the
perturbed areas of the black hole and cosmological horizons and is the product
of Type II$_{\infty}$ algebras on each horizon. In all cases, the von Neumann
entropy for semiclassical states is given by the generalized entropy. Our
results suggest that in all cases where there exists another "boundary
structure" (e.g., an asymptotic boundary or another Killing horizon) the
algebra of observables is Type II$_{\infty}$ and in the absence of such
structures (e.g., de Sitter) the algebra is Type II$_{1}$.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Nonstationary Laguerre-Gaussian states vs Landau ones: choose your
  fighter
Authors: G. K. Sizykh, A. D. Chaikovskaia, D. V. Grosman, I. I. Pavlov, D. V. Karlovets
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   Although the widely used stationary Landau states describe electrons with a
definite orbital angular momentum (OAM) in a magnetic field, it is the lesser
known nonstationary Laguerre-Gaussian (NSLG) states that appropriately
characterize vortex electrons after their transfer from free space to the
field. The reason is boundary conditions lead to oscillations of the r.m.s.
radius (the transverse coherence length) of the electron packet that has
entered a solenoid. We comprehensively investigate properties of the NSLG
states and establish their connections with the Landau states. For instance, we
show that the transverse coherence length of an electron in the field usually
oscillates around a value greatly exceeding the Landau state coherence length.
We also discuss sensitivity of the NSLG states to a small misalignment between
the propagation axis of a free electron and the field direction, which is
inevitable in a real experiment. It is shown that for any state-of-the-art
parameters, the corrections to the observables are negligible, and the electron
OAM stays robust to a small tilt of the propagation axis. Finally, we draw
analogies between a quantum wave packet and a classical beam of many particles
in phase space, calculating the mean emittance of the NSLG states, which acts
as a measure of their quantum nature.


Category: hep-th
Title: $\mathcal{A}$-hypergeometric functions and creation operators for
  Feynman and Witten diagrams
Authors: Francesca Caloro, Paul McFadden
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   Both Feynman integrals and holographic Witten diagrams can be represented as
multivariable hypergeometric functions of a class studied by Gel'fand, Kapranov
& Zelevinsky known as GKZ or $\mathcal{A}$-hypergeometric functions. Among
other advantages, this formalism enables the systematic construction of highly
non-trivial weight-shifting operators known as 'creation' operators. We derive
these operators from a physics perspective, highlighting their close relation
to the spectral singularities of the integral as encoded by the facets of the
Newton polytope. Many examples for Feynman and Witten diagrams are given,
including novel weight-shifting operators for holographic contact diagrams.
These in turn allow momentum-space exchange diagrams of different operator
dimensions to be related while keeping the spacetime dimension fixed. In
contrast to previous constructions, only non-derivative vertices are involved.


Category: hep-th
Title: Holographic Weak Measurement
Authors: Xinyu Sun, Shao-Kai Jian
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we study a holographic description of weak measurements in
conformal field theories (CFTs). Weak measurements can be viewed as a soft
projection that interpolates between an identity operator and a projection
operator, and can induce an effective central charge distinct from the
unmeasured CFT. We model the weak measurement by an interface brane, separating
different geometries dual to the post-measurement state and the unmeasured CFT,
respectively. In an infinite system, the weak measurement is related to ICFT
via a spacetime rotation. We find that the holographic entanglement entropy
with twist operators located on the defect is consistent in both calculations
for ICFT and weak measurements. We additionally calculate the boundary entropy
via holographic entanglement as well as partition function. In a finite system,
the weak measurement can lead to a rich phase diagram: for marginal
measurements the emergent brane separates two AdS geometries, while for
irrelevant measurements the post-measurement geometry features an AdS spacetime
and a black hole spacetime that are separated by the brane. Although the
measurement is irrelevant in the later phase, the post-measurement geometry can
realize a Python's lunch.


Category: hep-th
Title: Generalized Black Hole Entropy is von Neumann Entropy
Authors: Jonah Kudler-Flam, Samuel Leutheusser, Gautam Satishchandran
Date: 2023-09-27T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   It was recently shown that the von Neumann algebras of observables dressed to
the mass of a Schwarzschild-AdS black hole or an observer in de Sitter are Type
II, and thus admit well-defined traces. The von Neumann entropies of
"semi-classical" states were found to be generalized entropies. However, these
arguments relied on the existence of an equilibrium (KMS) state and thus do not
apply to, e.g., black holes formed from gravitational collapse, Kerr black
holes, or black holes in asymptotically de Sitter space. In this paper, we
present a general framework for obtaining the algebra of dressed observables
for linear fields on any spacetime with a Killing horizon. We prove, assuming
the existence of a stationary (but not necessarily KMS) state and suitable
decay of solutions, a structure theorem that the algebra of dressed observables
always contains a Type II factor "localized" on the horizon. These assumptions
have been rigorously proven in most cases of interest. Applied to the algebra
in the exterior of an asymptotically flat Kerr black hole, where the fields are
dressed to the black hole mass and angular momentum, we find a product of a
Type II$_{\infty}$ algebra on the horizon and a Type I$_{\infty}$ algebra at
past null infinity. In Schwarzschild-de Sitter, despite the fact that we
introduce an observer, the quantum field observables are dressed to the
perturbed areas of the black hole and cosmological horizons and is the product
of Type II$_{\infty}$ algebras on each horizon. In all cases, the von Neumann
entropy for semiclassical states is given by the generalized entropy. Our
results suggest that in all cases where there exists another "boundary
structure" (e.g., an asymptotic boundary or another Killing horizon) the
algebra of observables is Type II$_{\infty}$ and in the absence of such
structures (e.g., de Sitter) the algebra is Type II$_{1}$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Basis decompositions of genus-one string integrals
Authors: Carlos Rodriguez, Oliver Schlotterer, Yong Zhang
Date: 2023-09-27T17:55:15Z
Abstract:   One-loop scattering amplitudes in string theories involve configuration-space
integrals over genus-one surfaces with coefficients of Kronecker-Eisenstein
series in the integrand. A conjectural genus-one basis of integrands under Fay
identities and integration by parts was recently constructed out of chains of
Kronecker-Eisenstein series. In this work, we decompose a variety of more
general genus-one integrands into the conjectural chain basis. The explicit
form of the expansion coefficients is worked out for infinite families of cases
where the Kronecker-Eisenstein series form cycles. Our results can be used to
simplify multiparticle amplitudes in supersymmetric, heterotic and bosonic
string theories and to investigate loop-level echoes of the field-theory
double-copy structures of string tree-level amplitudes. The multitude of basis
reductions in this work strongly validate the recently proposed chain basis and
stimulate mathematical follow-up studies of more general configuration-space
integrals with additional marked points or at higher genus.


Category: hep-th
Title: The R-Matrix in 3d Topological BF Theory
Authors: Nanna Havn Aamand
Date: 2023-09-27T17:54:02Z
Abstract:   In this paper I study Wilson line operators in a certain type of split
Chern-Simons theory on a manifold with boundaries. The resulting gauge theory
is a 3d topological BF theory equivalent to a topologically twisted 3d
$\mathcal N=4$ theory. I show that this theory realises solutions to the
quantum Yang-Baxter equation all orders in perturbation theory as the
expectation value of crossing Wilson lines.


Category: hep-th
Title: Induced gravitational waves from flipped SU(5) superstring theory at
  $\mathrm{nHz}$
Authors: Spyros Basilakos, Dimitri V. Nanopoulos, Theodoros Papanikolaou, Emmanuel N. Saridakis, Charalampos Tzerefos
Date: 2023-09-27T17:45:46Z
Abstract:   The no-scale flipped SU(5) superstring framework constitutes a very promising
paradigm for physics below the Planck scale providing us with a very rich
cosmological phenomenology in accordance with observations. In particular, it
can accommodate Starobinsky-like inflation, followed by a reheating phase,
which is driven by a light "flaton" field, and during which the GUT phase
transition occurs. In this Letter, we extract for the first time a
gravitational-wave (GW) signal which naturally arises in the context of the
flipped SU(5) cosmological phenomenology and is related to the existence of an
early matter era (eMD) driven by the flaton field. Specifically, we study GWs
non-linearly induced by inflationary perturbations and which are abundantly
produced during a sudden transition from the flaton-driven eMD era to the
late-time radiation-dominated era. Remarkably, we find a GW signal with a
characteristic peak frequency $f_\mathrm{GW,peak}$ depending only on the string
slope $\alpha'$ and reading as $f_\mathrm{GW,peak} \propto 10^{-9}
\left(\frac{\alpha'}{\alpha'_*}\right)^4 \mathrm{Hz}$, where $\alpha'_{*}$ is
the fiducial string slope being related directly to the reduced Planck scale
$M_\mathrm{Pl}$ as $\alpha'_{*} = 8/M^2_\mathrm{Pl}$. Interestingly enough,
$f_\mathrm{GW,peak}$ lies within the $\mathrm{nHz}$ frequency range; hence
rendering this primordial GW signal potentially detectable by SKA, NANOGrav and
PTA probes at their very low frequency region of their detection bands.


Category: hep-th
Title: Hidden U(N) Symmetry behind N=1 Superamplitudes
Authors: Antonio Delgado, Adam Martin, Runqing Wang
Date: 2023-09-27T17:21:28Z
Abstract:   In this paper we develop a Young diagram approach to constructing higher
dimensional operators formed from massless superfields and their
superderivatives in $\mathcal{N}=1$ supersymmetry. These operators are in
one-to-one correspondence with non-factorizable terms in on-shell
superamplitudes, which can be studied with massless spinor helicity techniques.
By relating all spin-helicity variables to certain representations under a
hidden $U(N)$ symmetry behind the theory, we show each non-factorizable
superamplitude can be identified with a specific Young tableau. The desired
tableau is picked out of a more general set of $U(N)$ tensor products by
enforcing the supersymmetric Ward identities. We then relate these Young
tableaux to higher dimensional superfield operators and list the rules to read
operators directly from Young tableau. Using this method, we present several
illustrative examples.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Post-fabrication tuning of circular Bragg resonators for enhanced
  emitter-cavity coupling
Authors: Tobias M. Krieger, Christian Weidinger Thomas Oberleitner Gabriel Undeutsch, Michele B. Rota, Naser Tajik, Maximilian Aigner, Quirin Buchinger, Christian Schimpf, Ailton J. Garcia Jr., Saimon F. Covre da Silva, Sven Höfling, Tobias Huber-Loyola, Rinaldo Trotta, Armando Rastelli
Date: 2023-09-27T17:21:13Z
Abstract:   Solid-state quantum emitters embedded in circular Bragg resonators are
attractive due to their ability to emit quantum states of light with high
brightness and low multi-photon probability. As for any emitter-microcavity
system, fabrication imperfections limit the spatial and spectral overlap of the
emitter with the cavity mode, thus limiting their coupling strength. Here, we
show that an initial spectral mismatch can be corrected after device
fabrication by repeated wet chemical etching steps. We demonstrate ~16 nm
wavelength tuning for optical modes in AlGaAs resonators on oxide, leading to a
4-fold Purcell enhancement of the emission of single embedded GaAs quantum
dots. Numerical calculations reproduce the observations and suggest that the
achievable performance of the resonator is only marginally affected in the
explored tuning range. We expect the method to be applicable also to circular
Bragg resonators based on other material platforms, thus increasing the device
yield of cavity-enhanced solid-state quantum emitters.


Category: hep-th
Title: Unification of Gravity and Internal Interactions
Authors: Spyros Konitopoulos, Danai Roumelioti, George Zoupanos
Date: 2023-09-27T17:16:50Z
Abstract:   In the gauge theoretic approach of gravity, General Relativity is described
by gauging the symmetry of the tangent manifold in four dimensions. Usually the
dimension of the tangent space is considered to be equal to the dimension of
the curved manifold. However, the tangent group of a manifold of dimension $d$
is not necessarily $SO_d$. It has been suggested earlier that by gauging an
enlarged symmetry of the tangent space in four dimensions one could unify
gravity with internal interactions. Here we consider such a unified model by
gauging the $SO_{(1,17)}$ as the extended Lorentz group overcoming in this way
some difficulties of the previous attempts of similar unification and
eventually we obtain the $SO_{10}$ GUT, supplemented by an $SU_2 \times SU_2$
global symmetry.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Phonon Pumping by Modulating the Ultrastrong Vacuum
Authors: Fabrizio Minganti, Alberto Mercurio, Fabio Mauceri, Marco Scigliuzzo, Salvatore Savasta, Vincenzo Savona
Date: 2023-09-27T17:11:40Z
Abstract:   The vacuum (i.e., ground state) of a system in ultrastrong light-matter
coupling contains particles that cannot be emitted without any dynamical
perturbation, and thus called virtual. We propose a protocol for inducing and
observing real mechanical excitations of a mirror enabled by the virtual
photons in the ground state of a tripartite system, where a resonant optical
cavity is ultrastrongly coupled to a two-level system (qubit) and, at the same
time, optomechanically coupled to a mechanical resonator. Real phonons are
coherently emitted when the frequency of the two-level system is modulated at a
frequency comparable to that of the mechanical resonator, therefore much lower
than the optical frequency. We demonstrate that this hybrid effect is a direct
consequence of the virtual photon population in the ground state. We propose
and accurately characterize a hybrid superconducting-optomechanical setup based
on available state-of-the-art technology, where this effect can be
experimentally observed.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A Quantum-Classical Hybrid Block-Matching Algorithm in Noisy Environment
  using Dissimilarity Measure
Authors: M. Martínez-Felipe, J. Montiel-Pérez, V. Onofre-González, A. Maldonado-Romo, Ricky Young
Date: 2023-09-27T17:11:22Z
Abstract:   A block-matching algorithm finds a group of similar image patches inside a
search area. Similarity/dissimilarity measures can help to solve this problem.
In different practical applications, finding groups of similar image blocks
within an ample search area is often necessary, such as video compression,
image clustering, vector quantization, and nonlocal noise reduction. In this
work, classical image processing is performed using Gaussian noise and image
size reduction with a fit of a Low-Pass Filter or Domain Transform. A
hierarchical search technique is implemented to encode the images by phase
operator. Using phase image coding with the quantum Fourier transform and the
Swap test, we propose a dissimilarity measure. Results were obtained with
perfect and noisy simulations and in the case of the Swap test with the IBM and
Ionq quantum devices.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Reconciling quantum and classical spectral theories of ultrastrong
  coupling: Role of cavity bath coupling and gauge corrections
Authors: Stephen Hughes, Chris Gustin, Franco Nori
Date: 2023-09-27T17:08:27Z
Abstract:   Focusing on the widely adopted Hopfield model with cavity dissipation, we
show how the linear spectrum of an ultrastrongly coupled cavity and a dipole
can be described either classically or quantum mechanically, but only when the
quantum model includes (i) corrections to maintain gauge invariance, and (ii) a
specific type of cavity bath coupling. We also show the impact of this bath
model on the quantum Rabi model, which has no classical analogue in ultrastrong
coupling.


Category: hep-th
Title: AutoEFT: Automated Operator Construction for Effective Field Theories
Authors: Robert V. Harlander, Magnus C. Schaaf
Date: 2023-09-27T16:57:43Z
Abstract:   The program AutoEFT is described. It allows one to generate Effective Field
Theories (EFTs) from a given set of fields and symmetries. Allowed fields
include scalars, spinors, gauge bosons, and gravitons. The symmetries can be
local or global Lie groups based on U(1) and SU(N). The mass dimension of the
EFT is limited only by the available computing resources. The operators are
stored in a compact, human and machine-readable format. Aside from the program
itself, we provide input files for EFTs based on the Standard Model and a
number of its extensions. These include additional particles and symmetries,
EFTs with minimal flavor violation, and gravitons.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Noise propagation in hybrid tensor networks
Authors: Hiroyuki Harada, Yasunari Suzuki, Bo Yang, Yuuki Tokunaga, Suguru Endo
Date: 2023-09-27T16:19:19Z
Abstract:   The hybrid tensor network (HTN) method is a general framework allowing for
constructing an effective wavefunction with the combination of classical
tensors and quantum tensors, i.e., amplitudes of quantum states. In particular,
hybrid tree tensor networks are significantly useful for the simulation of
larger systems beyond the available size of quantum hardware. However, while
the realistic quantum states in NISQ hardware are highly likely to be noisy,
this framework is formulated for pure states. In this work, as well as
discussing the relevant methods, i.e., Deep VQE and entanglement forging under
the framework of hybrid tree tensor networks, we investigate the noisy HTN
states during contractions by introducing the expansion matrix for providing
the description of the expansion of the size of simulated quantum systems and
the noise propagation. This framework allows for the explicit representation of
the general tree HTN states and discussion of their physicality. We also show
that the expectation value of a measured observable exponentially vanishes with
the number of contracted quantum tensors. Our work will lead to providing the
noise-resilient construction of HTN states.


Category: quant-ph
Title: The Möbius game and other Bell tests for relativity
Authors: Eleftherios-Ermis Tselentis, Ämin Baumeler
Date: 2023-09-27T16:08:13Z
Abstract:   We derive multiparty games that, if the winning chance exceeds a certain
limit, prove the incompatibility of the parties' causal relations with any
partial order. This, in turn, means that the parties exert a back-action on the
causal relations; the causal relations are dynamical. The games turn out to be
representable by directed graphs, for instance by an orientation of the
M\"obius ladder. We discuss these games as device-independent tests of
spacetime's dynamical nature in general relativity. To do so, we design a
relativistic setting where, in the Minkowski spacetime, the winning chance is
bound to the limits. In contrast, we find otherwise tame processes with
classical control of causal order that win the games deterministically. These
suggest a violation of the bounds in gravitational implementations. We obtain
these games by uncovering a "pairwise central symmetry" of the correlations in
question. This symmetry allows us to recycle the facets of the acyclic subgraph
polytope studied by Gr\"otschel, J\"unger, and Reinelt in the mid-80s for
combinatorial optimization. In addition, we derive multiparty games in a
scenario where the polytope dimension grows only linearly in the number of
parties. Here, exceeding the limits not only proves the dynamical nature of the
causal relations, but also that the correlations are incompatible with any
global causal order.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantization of Yang-Mills Theory on de Sitter Spacetime
Authors: Aasiya Shaikh, Mir Faizal, Naveed Ahmad Shah
Date: 2023-09-27T16:04:51Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we will analyze the quantization of Yang-Mills theory on de
Sitter spacetime. It will be observed that the Faddeev-Popov ghost propagator
is divergent in de Sitter spacetime. However, this divergence will be removed
in an effective propagator, which will be suitable for the perturbation theory.
To show that the quantization of Yang-Mills theory in de Sitter is consistent,
we also quantize it using first-class constraints. We will be able to
demonstrate that this is equivalent to quantizing the theory in the Lorentz
gauge.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Comparing coherent and incoherent models for quantum homogenization
Authors: Anna Beever, Maria Violaris, Chiara Marletto, Vlatko Vedral
Date: 2023-09-27T15:52:33Z
Abstract:   Here we investigate the role of quantum interference in the quantum
homogenizer, whose convergence properties model a thermalization process. In
the original quantum homogenizer protocol, a system qubit converges to the
state of identical reservoir qubits through partial-swap interactions, that
allow interference between reservoir qubits. We design an alternative,
incoherent quantum homogenizer, where each system-reservoir interaction is
moderated by a control qubit using a controlled-swap interaction. We show that
our incoherent homogenizer satisfies the essential conditions for
homogenization, being able to transform a qubit from any state to any other
state to arbitrary accuracy, with negligible impact on the reservoir qubits'
states. Our results show that the convergence properties of homogenization
machines that are important for modelling thermalization are not dependent on
coherence between qubits in the homogenization protocol. We then derive bounds
on the resources required to re-use the homogenizers for performing state
transformations. This demonstrates that both homogenizers are universal for any
number of homogenizations, for an increased resource cost.


Category: hep-th
Title: Towards a quadratic Poisson algebra for the subtracted classical
  monodromy of Symmetric Space Sine-Gordon theories
Authors: Francois Delduc, Ben Hoare, Marc Magro
Date: 2023-09-27T15:28:34Z
Abstract:   Symmetric Space Sine-Gordon theories are two-dimensional massive integrable
field theories, generalising the Sine-Gordon and Complex Sine-Gordon theories.
To study their integrability properties on the real line, it is necessary to
introduce a subtracted monodromy matrix. Moreover, since the theories are not
ultralocal, a regularisation is required to compute the Poisson algebra for the
subtracted monodromy. In this article, we regularise and compute this Poisson
algebra for certain configurations, and show that it can both satisfy the
Jacobi identity and imply the existence of an infinite number of conserved
quantities in involution.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gravitating anisotropic merons and squashed spheres in the
  three-dimensional Einstein-Yang-Mills-Chern-Simons theory
Authors: Fabrizio Canfora, Cristóbal Corral
Date: 2023-09-27T14:35:24Z
Abstract:   We construct the first analytic examples of self-gravitating anisotropic
merons in the Einstein-Yang-Mills-Chern-Simons theory in three dimensions. The
gauge field configurations have different meronic parameters along the three
Maurer-Cartan $1$-forms and they are topologically nontrivial as the
Chern-Simons invariant is nonzero. The corresponding backreacted metric is
conformally a squashed three-sphere. The amount of squashing is related to the
degree of anisotropy of the gauge field configurations that we compute
explicitly in different limits of the squashing parameter. Moreover, the
spectrum of the Dirac operator on this background is obtained explicitly for
spin-1/2 spinors in the fundamental representation of $SU(2)$, and the genuine
non-Abelian contributions to the spectrum are identified. The physical
consequences of these results are discussed.


Category: hep-th
Title: Notes on Berends-Giele currents for extended gravity
Authors: Yi-Xiao Tao
Date: 2023-09-27T13:46:53Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we write down the Berends-Giele (BG) currents for extended
gravity explicitly and discuss the unifying relations of these BG currents.
This new tool, different from the double field theory current formally, may be
helpful in finding the explicit form of the current Kawai-Lewellen-Tye (KLT)
relation.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Group twirling and noise tailoring for multi-qubit controlled phase
  gates
Authors: Guoding Liu, Ziyi Xie, Zitai Xu, Xiongfeng Ma
Date: 2023-09-27T13:38:44Z
Abstract:   Group twirling is crucial in quantum information processing, particularly in
randomized benchmarking and random compiling. While protocols based on Pauli
twirling have been effectively crafted to transform arbitrary noise channels
into Pauli channels for Clifford gates -- thereby facilitating efficient
benchmarking and mitigating worst-case errors -- practical twirling groups for
multi-qubit non-Clifford gates are lacking. In this work, we study the issue of
finding twirling groups for generic quantum gates within a widely used circuit
structure in randomized benchmarking or random compiling. For multi-qubit
controlled phase gates, which are essential in both the quantum Fourier
transform and quantum search algorithms, we identify optimal twirling groups
within the realm of classically replaceable unitary operations. In contrast to
the simplicity of the Pauli twirling group for Clifford gates, the optimal
groups for such gates are much larger, highlighting the overhead of tailoring
noise channels in the presence of global non-Clifford gates.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Efficient tensor network simulation of IBM's largest quantum processors
Authors: Siddhartha Patra, Saeed S. Jahromi, Sukhbinder Singh, Roman Orus
Date: 2023-09-27T13:27:01Z
Abstract:   We show how quantum-inspired 2d tensor networks can be used to efficiently
and accurately simulate the largest quantum processors from IBM, namely Eagle
(127 qubits), Osprey (433 qubits) and Condor (1121 qubits). We simulate the
dynamics of a complex quantum many-body system -- specifically, the kicked
Ising experiment considered recently by IBM in Nature 618, p. 500-505 (2023) --
using graph-based Projected Entangled Pair States (gPEPS), which was proposed
by some of us in PRB 99, 195105 (2019). Our results show that simple tensor
updates are already sufficient to achieve very large unprecedented accuracy
with remarkably low computational resources for this model. Apart from
simulating the original experiment for 127 qubits, we also extend our results
to 433 and 1121 qubits, thus setting a benchmark for the newest IBM quantum
machines. We also report accurate simulations for infinitely-many qubits. Our
results show that gPEPS are a natural tool to efficiently simulate quantum
computers with an underlying lattice-based qubit connectivity, such as all
quantum processors based on superconducting qubits.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Harnessing energy extracted from heat engines to charge quantum
  batteries
Authors: Debarupa Saha, Aparajita Bhattacharyya, Kornikar Sen, Ujjwal Sen
Date: 2023-09-27T13:07:08Z
Abstract:   We explore the performance of three- and two-stroke heat engines with a
qutrit working substance in charging two-level quantum batteries. We first
classify the heat engines into two groups depending on their working methods.
The first type of heat engine, the sequential engine, evolves through three
distinct strokes, viz., heat, work, and cold strokes. In the second kind of
engine, a simultaneous engine, all the three events are made to occur
simultaneously in one stroke, followed by an additional stroke to thermalize
the working substance, i.e., the qutrit with a cold bath. We further categorize
these two types of engines into two classes depending on the type of
interaction between the working substance and the baths or the battery, viz.,
out-and-out engines, where the system bath interactions can invoke population
transitions between any two energy levels of the qutrit, and fragmented
engines, where only selective transition is materialized. Considering these
four types of heat engines, we analyze the work done by the working substance,
the percentage of charge accumulated by the quantum battery, and the efficiency
of the engine. By drawing a comparison between the charging schemes, we find
that the sequential out-and-out heat engines are most advantageous, providing
unit efficiency and transferring the most energy to the quantum battery, in the
optimal case. The ranking of the benefits obtained from the other three engines
depends on the quantity of interest.


Category: hep-th
Title: 2pf in single-trace $T\bar T$ holography
Authors: Amit Giveon
Date: 2023-09-27T13:01:55Z
Abstract:   The 2pf in single-trace $T\bar T$ holography was computed and analyzed for
operators in the $w=0$ sector in~\cite{Asrat:2017tzd}. Here we present its
immediate generalization to non-zero winding $w$. For long strings, the result
is identical to the one obtained within the TsT/$T\bar T$ approach
in~\cite{Cui:2023jrb} (up to a factor of the reflection coefficient).


Category: quant-ph
Title: Pulsar Classification: Comparing Quantum Convolutional Neural Networks
  and Quantum Support Vector Machines
Authors: Donovan Slabbert, Matt Lourens, Francesco Petruccione
Date: 2023-09-27T11:46:57Z
Abstract:   Well-known quantum machine learning techniques, namely quantum kernel
assisted support vector machines (QSVMs) and quantum convolutional neural
networks (QCNNs), are applied to the binary classification of pulsars. In this
comparitive study it is illustrated with simulations that both quantum methods
successfully achieve effective classification of the HTRU-2 data set that
connects pulsar class labels to eight separate features. QCNNs outperform the
QSVMs with respect to time taken to train and predict, however, if the current
NISQ era devices are considered and noise included in the comparison, then
QSVMs are preferred. QSVMs also perform better overall compared to QCNNs when
performance metrics are used to evaluate both methods. Classical methods are
also implemented to serve as benchmark for comparison with the quantum
approaches.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Self-energy correction to energy levels of highly charged ions in a path
  integral formalism
Authors: Sreya Banerjee, Zoltán Harman
Date: 2023-09-27T11:45:18Z
Abstract:   Self-energy corrections to the energy levels of bound electrons are
calculated in the framework of path integrals. We arrive at the full fermion
propagator, using methods of functional integrals, in the form of
Schwinger-Dyson equation (SDE). From the full fermion SDE, the self-energy
corrected propagator is identified and the energy shift is obtained from the
poles of the spectral function. The numerical calculations are performed using
complex contour integrals and the B-spline representation of basis functions.
We identify ions with Lamb shifts observable via modern mass spectrometric
methods.


Category: hep-th
Title: Non-perturbative aspects of two-dimensional $T\bar{T}$-deformed scalar
  theory from functional renormalization group
Authors: Jie Liu, Junichi Haruna, Masatoshi Yamada
Date: 2023-09-27T11:35:12Z
Abstract:   The $T\bar{T}$-deformed scalar field theory in two-dimensional spacetime is
studied by using the functional renormalization group. We drive the beta
functions for the couplings in the system and explore the fixed points. In
addition to the Gaussian (trivial) fixed point, we find a non-trivial fixed
point at which a new universality class exists and especially the deformation
parameter becomes relevant at the non-trivial fixed point. Therefore, the
$T\bar{T}$-deformed scalar field theory in two-dimensional spacetime could be
defined as a non-perturbatively renormalizable theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum autoencoders using mixed reference states
Authors: Hailan Ma, Gary J. Mooney, Ian R. Petersen, Lloyd C. L. Hollenberg, Daoyi Dong
Date: 2023-09-27T11:30:29Z
Abstract:   One of the fundamental tasks in information theory is the compression of
information. To achieve this in the quantum domain, quantum autoencoders that
aim to compress quantum states to low-dimensional ones have been proposed. When
taking a pure state as the reference state, there exists an upper bound for the
encoding fidelity. This bound limits the compression rate for high-rank states
that have high entropy. To overcome the entropy inconsistency between the
initial states and the reconstructed states, we allow the reference state to be
a mixed state. A new cost function that combines the encoding fidelity and the
quantum mutual information is proposed for compressing general input states. In
particular, we consider the reference states to be a mixture of maximally mixed
states and pure states. To achieve efficient compression for different states,
two strategies for setting the ratio of mixedness (in the mixture of maximally
mixed states and pure states) are provided based on prior knowledge about
quantum states or observations obtained from the training process. Numerical
results on thermal states of the transverse-field Ising model, Werner states,
and maximally mixed states blended with pure states illustrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. In addition, quantum autoencoders using
mixed reference states are experimentally implemented on IBM Quantum devices to
compress and reconstruct thermal states and Werner states.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Phase-Stable Traveling Waves Stroboscopically Matched for Super-Resolved
  Observation of Trapped-Ion Dynamics
Authors: Florian Hasse, Deviprasath Palani, Robin Thomm, Ulrich Warring, Tobias Schaetz
Date: 2023-09-27T11:28:45Z
Abstract:   In quantum technologies, it is essential to understand and exploit the
interplay of light and matter. We introduce an approach, creating and
maintaining the coherence of four oscillators: a global microwave reference
field, a polarization-gradient traveling-wave pattern of light, and the spin
and motional states of a single trapped ion. The features of our method are
showcased by probing the 140-nm periodic light pattern and stroboscopically
tracing dynamical variations in position and momentum observables with noise
floors of $1.8(2)\,$nm and $8(2)~$zN$\,\mu$s, respectively. The implications of
our findings contribute to enhancing quantum control and metrological
applications.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Trainability and Expressivity of Hamming-Weight Preserving Quantum
  Circuits for Machine Learning
Authors: Léo Monbroussou, Jonas Landman, Alex B. Grilo, Romain Kukla, Elham Kashefi
Date: 2023-09-27T10:11:07Z
Abstract:   Quantum machine learning has become a promising area for real world
applications of quantum computers, but near-term methods and their scalability
are still important research topics. In this context, we analyze the
trainability and controllability of specific Hamming weight preserving quantum
circuits. These circuits use gates that preserve subspaces of the Hilbert
space, spanned by basis states with fixed Hamming weight $k$. They are good
candidates for mimicking neural networks, by both loading classical data and
performing trainable layers. In this work, we first design and prove the
feasibility of new heuristic data loaders, performing quantum amplitude
encoding of $\binom{n}{k}$-dimensional vectors by training a n-qubit quantum
circuit. Then, we analyze more generally the trainability of Hamming weight
preserving circuits, and show that the variance of their gradients is bounded
according to the size of the preserved subspace. This proves the conditions of
existence of Barren Plateaus for these circuits, and highlights a setting where
a recent conjecture on the link between controllability and trainability of
variational quantum circuits does not apply.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Entanglement-Enhanced Quantum Strategies for Accurate Estimation of
  Multibody Group Motion and Moving Object Characteristics
Authors: Yongqiang Li, Changliang Ren
Date: 2023-09-27T10:09:13Z
Abstract:   This study presents a quantum strategy for simultaneous estimation of two
physical quantities using different entanglement resources. We explore the
utilization of positively or negatively timecorrelated photons. The proposed
method enables the detection of central position and relative velocity of
multibody systems, as well as precise measurement of size and velocity of
moving objects. Comparative analysis with other strategies reveals the superior
quantum advantage of our approach, particularly when appropriate entanglement
sources with high entanglement degree are employed. These findings contribute
to advancing our understanding of quantum strategies for accurate measurements.


Category: hep-th
Title: Classical conformal blocks, Coulomb gas integrals, and quantum
  integrable models
Authors: Marcin R. Piatek
Date: 2023-09-27T10:01:44Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we recall Richardson's solution of the reduced BCS model, its
relationship with the Gaudin model, and the known implementation of these
models in conformal field theory. The CFT techniques applied here are based on
the use of the free field realization, or more precisely, on the calculation of
saddle-point values of Coulomb gas integrals representing certain (perturbed)
WZW conformal blocks. We identify the saddle-point limit as the classical limit
of conformal blocks. We show that this observation implies a new method for
calculating classical conformal blocks and can be further used in the study of
quantum integrable models.


Category: hep-th
Title: The large-$N$ limit of the chiral condensate from twisted reduced models
Authors: Claudio Bonanno, Pietro Butti, Margarita García Peréz, Antonio González-Arroyo, Ken-Ichi Ishikawa, Masanori Okawa
Date: 2023-09-27T10:00:54Z
Abstract:   We compute the large-$N$ limit of the chiral condensate in quenched QCD on
the lattice using twisted reduced models, and performing controlled continuum
and chiral extrapolations. We perform two different calculations: one consists
in extracting the chiral condensate from the quark mass dependence of the pion
mass, and the other consists in extracting the chiral condensate from the
behaviour of the mode number of the Wilson-Dirac operator for small
eigenvalues. We find consistency between the results of the two methods, giving
a joint estimate of $\lim_{N\to\infty}\Sigma(N)/N=[184(13)$ MeV$]^3$
($\overline{\mathrm{MS}}$, $\mu=2$ GeV, taking $\sqrt{\sigma}=440$ MeV to set
the scale), in remarkable agreement with the $\mathrm{SU}(3)$ 2-flavor FLAG
result.


Category: hep-th
Title: The conformal sector of Quantum Einstein Gravity beyond the local
  potential approximation
Authors: Alfio Bonanno, Maria Conti, Dario Zappalà
Date: 2023-09-27T09:29:37Z
Abstract:   The anomalous scaling of Newton's constant around the Reuter fixed point is
dynamically computed using the functional flow equation approach. Specifically,
we thoroughly analyze the flow of the most general conformally reduced
Einstein-Hilbert action. Our findings reveal that, due to the distinctive
nature of gravity, the anomalous dimension $\eta$ of the Newton's constant
cannot be constrained to have one single value: the ultraviolet critical
manifold is characterized by a line of fixed points $(g_\ast(\eta),
\lambda_\ast (\eta))$, with a discrete (infinite) set of eigenoperators
associated to each fixed point. More specifically, we find three ranges of
$\eta$ corresponding to different properties of both fixed points and
eigenoperators and, in particular, the range $ \eta < \eta_c \approx 0.96$ the
ultraviolet critical manifolds has finite dimensionality.


Category: hep-th
Title: Genus-one open string amplitudes on AdS$_5\times$S$^3$ from CFT
Authors: Hynek Paul, Michele Santagata
Date: 2023-09-27T09:17:35Z
Abstract:   We bootstrap one-loop string corrections to the four-point function of
half-BPS operators in a 4d $\mathcal{N}=2$ SCFT with flavour group $SO(8)$,
dual to gluon scattering at genus one on AdS$_5\times$S$^3$. We identify an
8-dimensional organising principle which governs the spectrum of double-trace
anomalous dimensions, valid to all orders in the string length. This has
precise implications for the structure of one-loop Mellin amplitudes, which we
explicitly compute for the first three orders beyond the field-theory limit. We
also consider the corresponding position space representation, which is
entirely determined by the square of a certain differential operator acting on
a simpler "pre-correlator". Finally, we show that the flat-space limit of the
Mellin amplitudes exactly matches the logarithmic terms of the genus-one
amplitude in 8-dimensional flat space, which we compute via a partial-wave
analysis.


Category: hep-th
Title: Observational Constraints and Cosmological Implications of Scalar-Tensor
  $f(R, T)$ Gravity
Authors: Amine Bouali, Himanshu Chaudhary, Tiberiu Harko, Francisco S. N. Lobo, Taoufik Ouali, Miguel A. S. Pinto
Date: 2023-09-27T08:50:33Z
Abstract:   Recently, the scalar-tensor representation of $f (R,T)$ gravity was used to
explore gravitationally induced particle production/annihilation. Using the
framework of irreversible thermodynamics of open systems in the presence of
matter creation/annihilation, the physical and cosmological consequences of
this setup were investigated in detail. In this paper, we test observationally
the scalar-tensor representation of $f(R,T)$ gravity in the context of the
aforementioned framework, using the Hubble and Pantheon+ measurements. The best
fit parameters are obtained by solving numerically the modified Friedmann
equations of two distinct cosmological models in scalar tensor $f(R, T)$
gravity, corresponding to two different choices of the potential, and by
performing a Markov Chain Monte Carlo analysis. The best parameters are used to
compute the cosmographic parameters, i.e., the deceleration, the jerk and the
snap parameters. Using the output resulting from the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
analysis, the cosmological evolution of the creation pressure and of the matter
creation rates are presented for both models. To figure out the statistical
significance of the studied scalar-tensor $f(R,T)$ gravity, the Bayesian and
the corrected Akaike information criteria are used. The latter indicates that
the first considered model in scalar tensor $f(R,T)$ gravity is statistically
better than $\Lambda$CDM, i.e., it is more favored by observations. Besides, a
continuous particle creation process is present in Model 1. On the other hand,
for large redshifts, in Model 2 the particle creation rate may become negative,
thus indicating the presence of particle annihilation processes. However, both
models lead to an accelerating expansion of the Universe at late times, with a
deceleration parameter equivalent to that of the $\Lambda$CDM model.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Temperature fluctuations in mesoscopic systems
Authors: Zhaoyu Fei, Yu-Han Ma
Date: 2023-09-27T08:38:52Z
Abstract:   We study temperature fluctuations in mesoscopic $N$-body systems undergoing
non-equilibrium processes from the perspective of stochastic thermodynamics. By
introducing a stochastic differential equation, we describe the evolution of
the system's temperature during an isothermal process, with the noise term
accounting for finite-size effects arising from random energy transfer between
the system and the reservoir. Our analysis reveals that these fluctuations make
the extensive quantities (in the thermodynamic limit) deviate from being
extensive for consistency with the theory of equilibrium fluctuation. Moreover,
we derive finite-size corrections to the Jarzynski equality, providing insights
into how heat capacity influences such corrections. Also, our results indicate
a possible violation of the principle of maximum work by an amount proportional
to $N^{-1}$. Additionally, we examine the impact of temperature fluctuations in
a finite-size quasi-static Carnot engine. We show that irreversible entropy
production resulting from the temperature fluctuations of the working substance
diminishes the average efficiency of the cycle as $\eta_{\rm{C}}-\left\langle
\eta\right\rangle \sim N^{-1}$, highlighting the unattainability of the Carnot
efficiency $\eta_{\rm{C}}$ for mesoscopic-scale heat engines even under the
quasi-static limit


Category: quant-ph
Title: Comparisons among the Performances of Randomized-framed Benchmarking
  Protocols under T1, T2 and Coherent Error Models
Authors: Xudan Chai, Yanwu Gu, Weifeng Zhuang, Peng Qian, Xiao Xiao, Dong E Liu
Date: 2023-09-27T08:25:00Z
Abstract:   While fundamental scientific researchers are eagerly anticipating the
breakthroughs of quantum computing both in theory and technology, the current
quantum computer, i.e. noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computer
encounters a bottleneck in how to deal with the noisy situation of the quantum
machine. It is still urgently required to construct more efficient and reliable
benchmarking protocols through which one can assess the noise level of a
quantum circuit that is designed for a quantum computing task. The existing
methods that are mainly constructed based on a sequence of random circuits,
such as randomized benchmarking (RB), have been commonly adopted as the
conventional approach owning to its reasonable resource consumption and
relatively acceptable reliability, compared with the average gate fidelity. To
more deeply understand the performances of the above different
randomized-framed benchmarking protocols, we design special random circuit
sequences to test the performances of the three selected standard
randomized-frame protocols under T1, T2, and coherent errors, which are
regarded to be more practical for a superconductor quantum computer. The
simulations indicate that MRB, DRB, and CRB sequentially overestimate the
average error rate in the presence of T1 and T2 noise, compared with the
conventional circuit's average error. Moreover, these methods exhibit almost
the same level of sensitivity to the coherent error. Furthermore, the DRB loses
its reliability when the strengths of T1 grow. More practically, the simulated
conclusion is verified by running the designed tasks for three protocols on the
Quafu quantum computation cloud platform. We find that MRB produces a more
precise assessment of a quantum circuit conditioned on limited resources.
However, the DRB provides a more stable estimation at a specific precision
while a more resource-consuming.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Tomography of entangling two-qubit logic operations in exchange-coupled
  donor electron spin qubits
Authors: Holly G. Stemp, Serwan Asaad, Mark R. van Blankenstein, Arjen Vaartjes, Mark A. I. Johnson, Mateusz T. Mądzik, Amber J. A. Heskes, Hannes R. Firgau, Rocky Y. Su, Chih Hwan Yang, Arne Laucht, Corey I. Ostrove, Kenneth M. Rudinger, Kevin Young, Robin Blume-Kohout, Fay E. Hudson, Andrew S. Dzurak, Kohei M. Itoh, Alexander M. Jakob, Brett C. Johnson, David N. Jamieson, Andrea Morello
Date: 2023-09-27T07:58:37Z
Abstract:   Scalable quantum processors require high-fidelity universal quantum logic
operations in a manufacturable physical platform. The spin of an electron bound
to a single donor atom in silicon has shown coherence times of almost a second,
with single qubit quantum operation fidelities of over 99.9%. In order to
perform multi-qubit operations, the exchange interaction is typically used in
order to couple the electrons of neighbouring donor atoms. However, the donor
electron qubit performance in the presence of a weak, always-on, exchange
interaction has yet to be fully characterised. Here we present the experimental
demonstration and tomography of universal 1- and 2-qubit gates in a system of
two weakly exchange-coupled electrons, with each electron bound to a single
phosphorus nucleus. By deterministically preparing the two nuclear spins in
opposite directions, each electron spin resonance pulse constitutes a native
conditional two-qubit gate. We carefully benchmark these native operations
using gate set tomography (GST), achieving single qubit gate fidelities above
99% for both electrons. The electrons in the weak-exchange regime are found to
retain similarly high coherence times as single donor electrons, demonstrating
its viability for a spin-based qubit platform.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Long-lived coherences in strongly interacting spin ensembles
Authors: William K. Schenken, Simon A. Meynell, Francisco Machado, Bingtian Ye, Claire A. McLellan, Maxime Joos, V. V. Dobrovitski, Norman Y. Yao, Ania C. Bleszynski Jayich
Date: 2023-09-27T07:16:06Z
Abstract:   Periodic driving has emerged as a powerful tool to control, engineer, and
characterize many-body quantum systems. However, the required pulse sequences
are often complex, long, or require the ability to control the individual
degrees of freedom. In this work, we study how a simple Carr-Purcell
Meiboom-Gill (CPMG)-like pulse sequence can be leveraged to enhance the
coherence of a large ensemble of spin qubits and serve as an important
characterization tool. We implement the periodic drive on an ensemble of dense
nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond and examine the effect of pulse
rotation offset as a control parameter on the dynamics. We use a single diamond
sample prepared with several spots of varying NV density, which, in turn,
varies the NV-NV dipolar interaction strength. Counter-intuitively, we find
that rotation offsets deviating from the ideal {\pi}-pulse in the CPMG sequence
(often classified as pulse errors) play a critical role in preserving coherence
even at nominally zero rotation offset. The cause of the coherence preservation
is an emergent effective field that scales linearly with the magnitude of the
rotation offset. In addition to extending coherence, we compare the rotation
offset dependence of coherence to numerical simulations to measure the disorder
and dipolar contributions to the Hamiltonian to quantitatively extract the
densities of the constituent spin species within the diamond.


Category: hep-th
Title: A new class of anisotropic rotating fluids and some throat-like sources
  for Kerr metric as examples
Authors: Stefano Viaggiu
Date: 2023-09-27T06:59:50Z
Abstract:   Motivated by the increasing interest in finding physically viable rotating
sources, we present a new class of anisotropic rotating solutions. The
energy-momentum tensor compatible with the metric is composed of anisotropic
matter with a non-vanishing energy flow around the symmetry axis and vanishing
viscosity. The new class of solutions can be used to find new possible sources
for the Kerr metric, to obtain new regular black hole solutions and to study
galaxies with a central rotating black hole and an halo of dark matter. As an
example, we obtain a 5-parameter class of solutions representing a two-way
traversable wormhole smoothly matched to the Kerr one and satisfying all energy
conditions outside the wormhole for a wide range of parameters, in particular
for compact objects. Finally, with a simple modification of the aforementioned
solution, we obtain a source for Kerr metric with a throat geometry,
non-representing a two-way traversable wormhole and satisfying all energy
conditions.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum particle under dynamical confinement: From quantum Fermi
  acceleration to high harmonic generation
Authors: S. Rakhmanov, C. Trunk, D. Matrasulov
Date: 2023-09-27T03:57:33Z
Abstract:   Quantum dynamics of a particle confined in a box with time-dependent wall is
revisited by considering some unexplored aspects of the problem. In particular,
the case of dynamical confinement in a time-dependent box in the presence of
purely time-varying external potential is treated by obtaining exact solution.
Also, some external potentials approving separation of space and time variables
in the Schrodinger equation with time-dependent boundary conditions are
classified. Time-dependence of the average kinetic energy and average quantum
force are analyzed. A model for optical high harmonic generation in the
presence of dynamical confinement and external linearly polarized monochromatic
field is proposed.


Category: hep-th
Title: Debye Screening of Non-Abelian Plasmas in Curved Spacetimes
Authors: Elba Alonso-Monsalve, David I. Kaiser
Date: 2023-09-27T03:33:17Z
Abstract:   Decades of analytic and computational work have demonstrated that a charge
immersed in a hot plasma is screened. For both Abelian and non-Abelian
interactions, the characteristic screening length $1/m_D$ is set by the
so-called Debye mass $m_D \sim g_s T$, proportional to the plasma temperature
$T$ and the dimensionless gauge coupling $g_s$. One of the most interesting
naturally occurring examples is the quark-gluon plasma (QGP) that filled the
early universe prior to the QCD confinement phase transition at $t_{\rm QCD}
\sim 10^{-5}\,{\rm s}$. During this early epoch, regimes of strong spacetime
curvature are of significant cosmological interest, such as near primordial
black holes (PBHs). However, the typical description of Debye screening only
applies within Minkowski spacetime, and is therefore insufficient to describe
the dynamics of charged plasmas near PBHs or other primordial features. We
construct an effective field theory for soft modes of the gauge field $A_\mu^a$
to give a full description of Debye screening in non-Abelian plasmas within
arbitrary curved spacetimes, recovering a temperature-dependent Debye mass that
exhibits gravitational redshift. We then apply our results to some scenarios of
cosmological interest: an expanding FLRW universe and the vicinity of a PBH
immersed in a hot QGP.


Category: hep-th
Title: Non-stationary difference equation and affine Laumon space II: Quantum
  Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equation
Authors: Hidetoshi Awata, Koji Hasegawa, Hiroaki Kanno, Ryo Ohkawa, Shamil Shakirov, Jun'ichi Shiraishi, Yasuhiko Yamada
Date: 2023-09-27T02:15:02Z
Abstract:   We show that Shakirov's non-stationary difference equation, when it is
truncated, implies the quantum Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov ($q$-KZ) equation for
$U_{\mathsf v}(A_1^{(1)})$ with generic spins. Namely we can tune mass
parameters so that the Hamiltonian acts on the space of finite Laurent
polynomials. Then the representation matrix of the Hamiltonian agrees with the
$R$-matrix, or the quantum $6j$ symbols. On the other hand, we prove that the
$K$ theoretic Nekrasov partition function from the affine Laumon space is
identified with the well-studied Jackson integral solution to the $q$-KZ
equation. Combining these results, we establish that the affine Laumon
partition function gives a solution to Shakirov's equation, which was a
conjecture in our previous paper. We also work out the base-fiber duality and
four dimensional limit in relation with the $q$-KZ equation.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Atomic excitation delocalization at the clean to disordered interface in
  a chirally-coupled atomic array
Authors: C. -C. Wu, K. -T. Lin, I G. N. Y. Handayana, C. -H. Chien, S. Goswami, G. -D. Lin, Y. -C. Chen, H. H. Jen
Date: 2023-09-27T02:05:11Z
Abstract:   In one-dimensional quantum emitter systems, the dynamics of atomic
excitations are influenced by the collective coupling between atoms through
photon-mediated dipole-dipole interactions. By introducing positional disorders
in a portion of the atomic array, we investigate the delocalization phenomena
at the interface between disordered zone and clean zone. The excitation is
initialized as symmetric Dicke states in the disordered zone, and several
measures are used to quantify the excitation localization. We first use
population imbalance and half-chain entropy to investigate the excitation
dynamics under time evolutions, and further investigate the crossover of
excitation localization to delocalization via the gap ratio from the
eigenspectrum in the reciprocal coupling case. In particular, we study the
participation ratio of the whole chain and the photon loss ratio between both
ends of the atomic chain, which can be used to quantify the delocalization
crossover in the non-reciprocal coupling cases. Furthermore, by increasing the
overall size or the ratio of the disordered zone under a fixed number of the
whole chain, we observe that excitation localization occurs at a smaller
disorder strength in the former case, while in the latter, a facilitation of
the delocalization appears when a significant ratio of clean zone to disordered
zone is applied. Our results can reveal the competition between the clean zone
and the disordered zone sizes on localization phenomenon, give insights to
non-equilibrium dynamics in the atom-waveguide interface, and provide potential
applications in quantum information processing.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Splitting decoders for correcting hypergraph faults
Authors: Nicolas Delfosse, Adam Paetznick, Jeongwan Haah, Matthew B. Hastings
Date: 2023-09-27T01:49:04Z
Abstract:   The surface code is one of the most popular quantum error correction codes.
It comes with efficient decoders, such as the Minimum Weight Perfect Matching
(MWPM) decoder and the Union-Find (UF) decoder, allowing for fast quantum error
correction. For a general linear code or stabilizer code, the decoding problem
is NP-hard. What makes it tractable for the surface code is the special
structure of faults and checks: Each X and Z fault triggers at most two checks.
As a result, faults can be interpreted as edges in a graph whose vertices are
the checks, and the decoding problem can be solved using standard graph
algorithms such as Edmonds' minimum-weight perfect matching algorithm. For
general codes, this decoding graph is replaced by a hypergraph making the
decoding problem more challenging. In this work, we propose two heuristic
algorithms for splitting the hyperedges of a decoding hypergraph into edges.
After splitting, hypergraph faults can be decoded using any surface code
decoder. Due to the complexity of the decoding problem, we do not expect this
strategy to achieve a good error correction performance for a general code.
However, we empirically show that this strategy leads to a good performance for
some classes of LDPC codes because they are defined by low weight checks. We
apply this splitting decoder to Floquet codes for which some faults trigger up
to four checks and verify numerically that this decoder achieves the maximum
code distance for two instances of Floquet codes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Trade-offs between unitary and measurement induced spin squeezing in
  cavity QED
Authors: Diego Barberena, Anjun Chu, James K. Thompson, Ana Maria Rey
Date: 2023-09-27T01:49:01Z
Abstract:   We study the combined effects of measurements and unitary evolution on the
preparation of spin squeezing in an ensemble of atoms interacting with a single
electromagnetic field mode inside a cavity. We derive simple criteria that
determine the conditions at which measurement based entanglement generation
overperforms unitary protocols. We include all relevant sources of decoherence
and study both their effect on the optimal spin squeezing and the overall size
of the measurement noise, which limits the dynamical range of quantum-enhanced
phase measurements. Our conclusions are relevant for state-of-the-art atomic
clocks that aim to operate below the standard quantum limit.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A model of randomly-coupled Pauli spins
Authors: Masanori Hanada, Antal Jevicki, Xianlong Liu, Enrico Rinaldi, Masaki Tezuka
Date: 2023-09-27T01:36:01Z
Abstract:   We construct a model of Pauli spin operators with all-to-all 4-local
interactions by replacing Majorana fermions in the SYK model with spin
operators. Equivalently, we replace fermions with hard-core bosons. We study
this model numerically and compare the properties with those of the SYK model.
We observe a striking quantitative coincidence between the spin model and the
SYK model, which suggests that this spin model is strongly chaotic and,
perhaps, can play some role in holography. We also discuss the path-integral
approach with multi-local fields and the possibility of quantum simulations.
This model may be an interesting target for quantum simulations because Pauli
spins are easier to implement than fermions on qubit-based quantum devices.


Category: hep-th
Title: A model of randomly-coupled Pauli spins
Authors: Masanori Hanada, Antal Jevicki, Xianlong Liu, Enrico Rinaldi, Masaki Tezuka
Date: 2023-09-27T01:36:01Z
Abstract:   We construct a model of Pauli spin operators with all-to-all 4-local
interactions by replacing Majorana fermions in the SYK model with spin
operators. Equivalently, we replace fermions with hard-core bosons. We study
this model numerically and compare the properties with those of the SYK model.
We observe a striking quantitative coincidence between the spin model and the
SYK model, which suggests that this spin model is strongly chaotic and,
perhaps, can play some role in holography. We also discuss the path-integral
approach with multi-local fields and the possibility of quantum simulations.
This model may be an interesting target for quantum simulations because Pauli
spins are easier to implement than fermions on qubit-based quantum devices.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Simulation of noisy Clifford circuits without fault propagation
Authors: Nicolas Delfosse, Adam Paetznick
Date: 2023-09-27T01:30:03Z
Abstract:   The design and optimization of a large-scale fault-tolerant quantum computer
architecture relies extensively on numerical simulations to assess the
performance of each component of the architecture. The simulation of
fault-tolerant gadgets, which are typically implemented by Clifford circuits,
is done by sampling circuit faults and propagating them through the circuit to
check that they do not corrupt the logical data. One may have to repeat this
fault propagation trillions of times to extract an accurate estimate of the
performance of a fault-tolerant gadget. For some specific circuits, such as the
standard syndrome extraction circuit for surface codes, we can exploit the
natural graph structure of the set of faults to perform a simulation without
fault propagation. We propose a simulation algorithm for all Clifford circuits
that does not require fault propagation and instead exploits the mathematical
structure of the spacetime code of the circuit. Our algorithm, which we name
adjoint-based code (ABC) simulation, relies on the fact that propagation
forward is the adjoint of propagation backward in the sense of Proposition 3
from [14]. We use this result to replace the propagation of trillions of
fault-configurations by the backward propagation of a small number of Pauli
operators which can be precomputed once and for all.


Category: quant-ph
Title: First-Order Crosstalk Mitigation in Parallel Quantum Gates Driven With
  Multi-Photon Transitions
Authors: Matthew N. H. Chow, Christopher G. Yale, Ashlyn D. Burch, Megan Ivory, Daniel S. Lobser, Melissa C. Revelle, Susan M. Clark
Date: 2023-09-27T01:15:45Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate an order of magnitude reduction in the sensitivity to optical
crosstalk for neighboring trapped-ion qubits during simultaneous single-qubit
gates driven with individual addressing beams. Gates are implemented via
two-photon Raman transitions, where crosstalk is mitigated by offsetting the
drive frequencies for each qubit to avoid first-order crosstalk effects from
inter-beam two-photon resonance. The technique is simple to implement, and we
find that phase-dependent crosstalk due to optical interference is reduced on
the most impacted neighbor from a maximal fractional rotation error of 0.185(4)
without crosstalk mitigation to $\leq$ 0.006 with the mitigation strategy.
Further, we characterize first-order crosstalk in the two-qubit gate and avoid
the resulting rotation errors for the arbitrary-axis M{\o}lmer-S{\o}rensen gate
via a phase-agnostic composite gate. Finally, we demonstrate holistic system
performance by constructing a composite CNOT gate using the improved
single-qubit gates and phase-agnostic two-qubit gate. This work is done on the
Quantum Scientific Computing Open User Testbed (QSCOUT); however, our methods
are widely applicable for individual-addressing Raman gates and impose no
significant overhead, enabling immediate improvement for quantum processors
that incorporate this technique.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Detecting quantum phase transitions in a frustrated spin chain via
  transfer learning of a quantum classifier algorithm
Authors: André J. Ferreira-Martins, Leandro Silva, Alberto Palhares, Rodrigo Pereira, Diogo O. Soares-Pinto, Rafael Chaves, Askery Canabarro
Date: 2023-09-27T01:11:11Z
Abstract:   The classification of phases and the detection of phase transitions are
central and challenging tasks in diverse fields. Within physics, it relies on
the identification of order parameters and the analysis of singularities in the
free energy and its derivatives. Here, we propose an alternative framework to
identify quantum phase transitions. Using the axial next-nearest neighbor Ising
(ANNNI) model as a benchmark, we show how machine learning can detect three
phases (ferromagnetic, paramagnetic, and a cluster of the antiphase with the
floating phase). Employing supervised learning, we demonstrate the feasibility
of transfer learning. Specifically, a machine trained only with
nearest-neighbor interactions can learn to identify a new type of phase
occurring when next-nearest-neighbor interactions are introduced. We also
compare the performance of common classical machine learning methods with a
version of the quantum nearest neighbors (QNN) algorithm.


Category: hep-th
Title: Non-commutative gauge symmetry from strong homotopy algebras
Authors: Vladislav Kupriyanov, Fernando Oliveira, Alexey Sharapov, Dmitri Vassilevich
Date: 2023-09-27T00:06:17Z
Abstract:   We explicitly construct an L$_\infty$ algebra that defines U$_{\star}(1)$
gauge transformations on a space with an arbitrary non-commutative and even
non-associative star product. Matter fields are naturally incorporated in this
scheme as L$_\infty$ modules. Some possibilities for including P$_\infty$
algebras are also discussed.


Category: hep-th
Title: Functional renormalization group approach to dipolar fixed point which
  is scale-invariant but non-conformal
Authors: Yu Nakayama
Date: 2023-09-26T23:38:17Z
Abstract:   A dipolar fixed point introduced by Aharony and Fisher is a physical example
of interacting scale-invariant but non-conformal field theories. We find that
the perturbative critical exponents computed in $\epsilon$ expansions violate
the conformal bootstrap bound. We formulate the functional renormalization
group equations a la Wetterich and Polchinski to study the fixed point. We
present some results in three dimensions within (uncontrolled) local potential
approximations (with or without perturbative anomalous dimensions).


Category: quant-ph
Title: Non-standard quantum algebras and finite dimensional
  $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetric systems
Authors: Ángel Ballesteros, Romina Ramírez, Marta Reboiro
Date: 2023-09-26T23:17:22Z
Abstract:   In this work, $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetric Hamiltonians defined on quantum $sl(2,
\mathbb R)$ algebras are presented. We study the spectrum of a family of
non-Hermitian Hamiltonians written in terms of the generators of the
non-standard $U_{z}(sl(2, \mathbb R))$ Hopf algebra deformation of $sl(2,
\mathbb R)$. By making use of a particular boson representation of the
generators of $U_{z}(sl(2, \mathbb R))$, both the co-product and the
commutation relations of the quantum algebra are shown to be invariant under
the $\mathcal{PT}$-transformation. In terms of these operators, we construct
several finite dimensional $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetry Hamiltonians, whose spectrum
is analytically obtained for any arbitrary dimension. In particular, we show
the appearance of Exceptional Points in the space of model parameters and we
discuss the behaviour of the spectrum both in the exact $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetry
and the broken $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetry dynamical phases. As an application, we
show that this non-standard quantum algebra can be used to define an effective
model Hamiltonian describing accurately the experimental spectra of
three-electron hybrid qubits based on asymmetric double quantum dots.
Remarkably enough, in this effective model, the deformation parameter $z$ has
to be identified with the detuning parameter of the system.


Category: hep-th
Title: Self-gravitating N-body systems and Cosmological Large Scale Structures
Authors: George Savvidy
Date: 2023-09-26T22:21:17Z
Abstract:   Extended galaxy surveys revealed that at a large-scale the Universe consists
of matter concentrations in the form of galactic clusters, filaments and vast
regions devoid of galaxies. In this paper we shall investigate the problem of
structure formation in terms of nonlinear dynamics of a self-gravitating N-body
system. We reformulate the dynamics of a self-gravitating N-body system in
terms of a geodesic flow on a curved Riemannian manifold of dimension 3N
equipped by the Maupertuis's metric. The regions of negative sectional
curvatures are responsible for the exponential instability of geodesic
trajectories and for the chaotic behaviour of the system and the relaxation
phenomena, while the regions of the phase space of positive sectional
curvatures are responsible for the generation of geodesic focusing and
gravitational caustics, the regions of space where the density of matter -
particle and galaxies - is larger than in the ambient space of the Universe. We
investigate the structure formation dynamics by analysing the stability of
geodesic trajectories of N-body systems by means of the Jacobi deviation
equation and the geodesic focusing, generation of conjugate points and caustics
by means of the Raychaundhuri equation. By solving these equations for an
N-body system we estimated the characteristic relaxation time scales of stars
in galaxies in globular clusters and demonstrated the geodesic focusing
phenomenon in self-gravitating N-body systems that leads to the generation of
caustics. The gravitational caustics are space regions where the density of
matter is higher than the average density in the surrounding Universe. These
regions can represent galaxies, galactic clusters and filaments, and the
regions of lower density between caustics represent a relatively empty space,
the voids.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Information Driven Ansatz (QIDA): shallow-depth empirical
  quantum circuits from Quantum Chemistry
Authors: Davide Materia, Leonardo Ratini, Celestino Angeli, Leonardo Guidoni
Date: 2023-09-26T21:50:02Z
Abstract:   Hardware-efficient empirical variational ans\"atze for Variational Quantum
Eigensolver simulations of Quantum Chemistry suffer from the lack of a direct
connection to classical Quantum Chemistry methods. In the present work, we
propose a method to fill this gap by introducing a new approach for
constructing variational quantum circuits, leveraging quantum mutual
information associated with classical Quantum Chemistry states to design simple
yet effective heuristic ans\"atze with a topology that reflects the
correlations of the molecular system. As first step, Quantum Chemistry
calculations, such as M{\o}ller-Plesset (MP2) perturbation theory, firstly
provide an approximate Natural Orbitals basis, which has been recently shown to
be the best candidate one-electron basis for developing compact empirical
wavefunctions (Ratini, et al 2023). Secondly, throughout the evaluation of
quantum mutual information matrices, they provide information about the main
correlations between qubits of the quantum circuit, enabling the development of
a direct design of entangling blocks for the circuit. The resulting ansatz is
then utilized with a Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) to obtain a short
depth variational groundstate of the electronic Hamiltonian. To validate our
approach, we perform a comprehensive statistical analysis by simulations over
various molecular systems ($H_2, LiH, H_2O$) and apply it to the more complex
$NH_3$ molecule. The reported results demonstrate that the proposed methodology
gives rise to highly effective ans\"atze, surpassing the standard empirical
ladder-entangler ansatz in performance. Overall, our approach can be used as
effective state preparation providing a promising route for designing efficient
variational quantum circuits for large molecular systems.


Category: quant-ph
Title: The emergence of the hexagonal lattice in two-dimensional Wigner
  fragments
Authors: Miguel Escobar Azor, Amer Alrakik, Louan de Bentzmann, Xabier Telleria-Allika, Alfredo Sánchez de Merás, Stefano Evangelisti, J. Arjan Berger
Date: 2023-09-26T20:35:40Z
Abstract:   At very low density, the electrons in a uniform electron gas spontaneously
break symmetry and form a crystalline lattice [1]. This type of crystal was
first predicted in 1934 by Eugene Wigner and they are thus called Wigner
crystals [2]. But which type of crystal will the electrons form? Here we report
a numerical study of the density profiles of fragments of Wigner crystals from
first principles, i.e., without any empirical data or adjustable parameters. To
simulate the Wigner fragments we use Clifford periodic boundary conditions and
a renormalized distance in the Coulomb potential [3,4]. We show that these
boundary conditions together with high-spin restricted open-shell Hartree-Fock
theory provide a method that can accurately capture the Wigner localisation for
systems with many electrons. We do not make any assumptions about the positions
where the electrons will localise. The density profiles we obtain emerge
naturally when we minimise the total energy of the system. With our approach we
study two-dimensional Wigner fragments with up to 20 electrons. We clearly
observe the emergence of the hexagonal crystal structure which has been
predicted to be ground-state structure of the two-dimensional Wigner crystal.


Category: quant-ph
Title: SLIQ: Quantum Image Similarity Networks on Noisy Quantum Computers
Authors: Daniel Silver, Tirthak Patel, Aditya Ranjan, Harshitta Gandhi, William Cutler, Devesh Tiwari
Date: 2023-09-26T20:33:26Z
Abstract:   Exploration into quantum machine learning has grown tremendously in recent
years due to the ability of quantum computers to speed up classical programs.
However, these efforts have yet to solve unsupervised similarity detection
tasks due to the challenge of porting them to run on quantum computers. To
overcome this challenge, we propose SLIQ, the first open-sourced work for
resource-efficient quantum similarity detection networks, built with practical
and effective quantum learning and variance-reducing algorithms.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Non-Hermitian two-dimensional harmonic oscillator in noncommutative
  phase-space
Authors: Emanonfi Elias N'Dolo
Date: 2023-09-26T20:20:44Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we extend the result of [Andreas Fring et al J. Phys. A 43,
345401 (2010)] in noncommutative phase-space (NCPS). We compute the
non-Hermitian Hamiltonian of a harmonic oscillator in NCPS. We construct a new
P T-symmetry in noncommutative phase-space and prove that the system does not
possess a broken P T-regime. We then compute the eigenvalue spectrum of the
non-Hermitian Hamiltonian of the system.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Probability distributions of atomic scattering lengths
Authors: John L. Bohn, Reuben R. W. Wang
Date: 2023-09-26T20:02:15Z
Abstract:   The probability distribution of the real and imaginary parts of atomic
scattering lengths $a$ are derived, in a two-channel model that allows for
inelastic scattering to occur. While the real part of $a$ remains
Cauchy-distributed, as predicted for single channel scattering in the classic
work of Gribakin and Flambaum, the imaginary part of $a$ is seen to be strongly
peaked near zero. Two-body inelastic scattering rates may therefore be smaller
in general than a naive estimate would suggest.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A Highly Efficient and Pure Few-Photon Source on Chip
Authors: Zhaohui Ma, Jia-Yang Chen, Malvika Garikapati, Zhan Li, Chao Tang, Yong Meng Sua, Yu-Ping Huang
Date: 2023-09-26T19:54:57Z
Abstract:   We report on multi-photon statistics of correlated twin beams produced in a
periodic poled micro-ring resonator on thin-film lithium niobate. Owing to high
cavity confinement and near perfect quasi-phase matching, the photons pairs are
produced efficiently in single modes at rates reaching 27 MHz per $\mu$W pump
power. By using a pump laser whose pulse width impedance matches with the
cavity, those photons are further created in single longitudinal modes with
purity reaching 99\%, without relying on later-on filtering. With a
dual-channel photon-number resolving detection system, we obtain directly the
joint detection probabilities of multi-photon states up to three photons, with
high coincidence to accidental contrast for each. Used as a single photon
source, it gives heralded $g_H^{(2)}(0)$ around 0.04 at a single photon rate of
650 kHz on chip. The findings of our research highlight the potential of this
nanophotonic platform as a promising platform for generating non-classical,
few-photon states with ideal indistinguishability, for fundamental quantum
optics studies and information applications.


Category: hep-th
Title: New solvable two-matrix model and BKP tau function
Authors: E. N. Antonov, A. Yu. Orlov
Date: 2023-09-26T19:39:03Z
Abstract:   We present exactly solvable modifications of the two-matrix Zinn-Justin-Zuber
model and write it as a tau function. The grand partition function of these
matrix integrals is written as the fermion expectation value. The perturbation
theory series is written out explicitly in terms of series in strict
partitions. The related string equations are presented.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Predictive complexity of quantum subsystems
Authors: Curtis T. Asplund, Elisa Panciu
Date: 2023-09-26T18:58:56Z
Abstract:   We define predictive states and predictive complexity for quantum systems
composed of distinct subsystems. This complexity is a generalization of
entanglement entropy. It is inspired by the statistical or forecasting
complexity of predictive state analysis of stochastic and complex systems
theory, but is intrinsically quantum. Predictive states of a subsystem are
formed by equivalence classes of state vectors in the exterior Hilbert space
that effectively predict the same future behavior of that subsystem for some
time. As an illustrative example, we present calculations in the dynamics of an
isotropic Heisenberg model spin chain and show that, in comparison to the
entanglement entropy, the predictive complexity better signifies dynamically
important events, such as magnon collisions. We discuss how this quantity may
usefully characterize a variety of symmetries in quantum systems in an
information-theoretic way, and comment on possible applications and extensions.


Category: hep-th
Title: Predictive complexity of quantum subsystems
Authors: Curtis T. Asplund, Elisa Panciu
Date: 2023-09-26T18:58:56Z
Abstract:   We define predictive states and predictive complexity for quantum systems
composed of distinct subsystems. This complexity is a generalization of
entanglement entropy. It is inspired by the statistical or forecasting
complexity of predictive state analysis of stochastic and complex systems
theory, but is intrinsically quantum. Predictive states of a subsystem are
formed by equivalence classes of state vectors in the exterior Hilbert space
that effectively predict the same future behavior of that subsystem for some
time. As an illustrative example, we present calculations in the dynamics of an
isotropic Heisenberg model spin chain and show that, in comparison to the
entanglement entropy, the predictive complexity better signifies dynamically
important events, such as magnon collisions. We discuss how this quantity may
usefully characterize a variety of symmetries in quantum systems in an
information-theoretic way, and comment on possible applications and extensions.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Discrete-time quantum walks on Cayley graphs of Dihedral groups using
  generalized Grover coins
Authors: Rohit Sarma Sarkar, Bibhas Adhikari
Date: 2023-09-26T18:53:35Z
Abstract:   In this paper we study discrete-time quantum walks on Cayley graphs
corresponding to Dihedral groups, which are graphs with both directed and
undirected edges. We consider the walks with coins that are one-parameter
continuous deformation of the Grover matrix and can be written as linear
combinations of certain permutation matrices. We show that the walks are
periodic only for coins that are permutation or negative of a permutation
matrix. Finally, we investigate the localization property of the walks through
numerical simulations and observe that the walks localize for a wide range of
coins for different sizes of the graphs.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Characterising semi-Clifford gates using algebraic sets
Authors: Imin Chen, Nadish de Silva
Date: 2023-09-26T18:41:57Z
Abstract:   Motivated by their central role in fault-tolerant quantum computation, we
study the sets of gates of the third-level of the Clifford hierarchy and their
distinguished subsets of 'nearly diagonal' semi-Clifford gates. The Clifford
hierarchy gates can be implemented via gate teleportation given appropriate
magic states. The vast quantity of these resources states required for
achieving fault-tolerance is a significant bottleneck for experimental
implementations of universal quantum computers. Semi-Clifford gates are
important because they can be implemented with far more efficient use of these
resource states.
  We prove that every third-level gate of up to two qudits is semi-Clifford. We
thus generalise results of Zeng-Chen-Chuang (2008) in the qubit case and of the
second author (2020) in the qutrit case to the case of qudits of arbitrary
prime dimension $d$.
  Earlier results relied on exhaustive computations whereas our present work
leverages tools of algebraic geometry. Specifically, we construct two schemes
corresponding to the sets of third-level Clifford hierarchy gates and
third-level semi-Clifford gates. We then show that the two algebraic sets
resulting from reducing these schemes modulo $d$ share the same set of rational
points.


Category: hep-th
Title: Flat from anti-de Sitter
Authors: Andrea Campoleoni, Arnaud Delfante, Simon Pekar, P. Marios Petropoulos, David Rivera-Betancour, Matthieu Vilatte
Date: 2023-09-26T18:38:07Z
Abstract:   Ricci-flat solutions to Einstein's equations in four dimensions are obtained
as the flat limit of Einstein spacetimes with negative cosmological constant.
In the limiting process, the anti-de Sitter energy--momentum tensor is expanded
in Laurent series in powers of the cosmological constant, endowing the system
with the infinite number of boundary data, characteristic of the asymptotically
flat solution space. The governing flat Einstein dynamics is recovered as the
limit of the original energy--momentum conservation law and from the additional
requirement of the line-element finiteness, providing at each order the
necessary set of flux-balance equations for the boundary data. This analysis is
conducted using a covariant version of the Newman--Unti gauge designed for
taking advantage of the boundary Carrollian structure emerging at vanishing
cosmological constant and its Carrollian attributes such as the Cotton tensor.


Category: hep-th
Title: Invertibility of Condensation Defects and Symmetries of 2 + 1d QFTs
Authors: Matthew Buican, Rajath Radhakrishnan
Date: 2023-09-26T18:37:54Z
Abstract:   We characterize discrete (anti-)unitary symmetries and their non-invertible
generalizations in $2+1$d topological quantum field theories (TQFTs) through
their actions on line operators and fusion spaces. We explain all possible
sources of non-invertibility that can arise in this context. Our approach gives
a simple $2+1$d proof that non-invertible generalizations of unitary symmetries
exist if and only if a bosonic TQFT contains condensable bosonic line operators
(i.e., these non-invertible symmetries are necessarily "non-intrinsic"). Moving
beyond unitary symmetries and their non-invertible cousins, we define a
non-invertible generalization of time-reversal symmetries and derive various
properties of TQFTs with such symmetries. Finally, using recent results on
2-categories, we extend our results to corresponding statements in $2+1$d
quantum field theories that are not necessarily topological.


Category: hep-th
Title: Applied nonrelativistic conformal field theory: scattering-length and
  effective-range corrections to unnuclear physics
Authors: Subham Dutta Chowdhury, Ruchira Mishra, Dam Thanh Son
Date: 2023-09-26T18:20:04Z
Abstract:   Due to an accidentally large $s$-wave scattering length, in a relatively wide
range of energy, neutrons are approximately described by the nonrelativistic
conformal field theory of unitarity fermions, perturbed by one relevant and an
infinite number of irrelevant operators. We develop a formalism which provides
a nonperturbative definition of local operators in that nonrelativistic
conformal field theory. We compute the scattering-length and effective-range
corrections to the two-point functions of primary charge-three operators using
the technique of conformal perturbation theory. These calculations allow us to
find the first corrections to the scale-invariant behavior of the rate of
nuclear reactions with three neutrons in the final state in the regime when the
neutrons have small relative momenta.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Observable Thermalization: Theory, Numerical and Analytical Evidence
Authors: Lodovico Scarpa, Fabio Anza, Vlatko Vedral
Date: 2023-09-26T18:18:39Z
Abstract:   Predicting whether an observable will dynamically evolve to thermal
equilibrium in an isolated quantum system is an important open problem, as it
determines the applicability of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. The
Observable Thermalization framework has been proposed as a solution,
characterizing observables that thermalize using an observable-specific maximum
entropy principle. In this paper, we achieve three results. First, we confirm
the dynamical relaxation of local observables towards maximum entropy, in a 1D
Ising chain. Second, we provide the most general solution to the maximization
problem and numerically verify some general predictions about equilibrium
behavior in the same model. Third, we explore the emergence and physical
meaning of an observable-specific notion of energy. Our results mark
significant progress towards a fully predictive theory of thermalization in
isolated quantum systems and open interesting questions about
observable-specific thermodynamic quantities.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Symmetries as Ground States of Local Superoperators
Authors: Sanjay Moudgalya, Olexei I. Motrunich
Date: 2023-09-26T18:03:24Z
Abstract:   Symmetry algebras of quantum many-body systems with locality can be
understood using commutant algebras, which are defined as algebras of operators
that commute with a given set of local operators. In this work, we show that
these symmetry algebras can be expressed as frustration-free ground states of a
local superoperator, which we refer to as a "super-Hamiltonian". We demonstrate
this for conventional symmetries such as $Z_2$, $U(1)$, and $SU(2)$, where the
symmetry algebras map to various kinds of ferromagnetic ground states, as well
as for unconventional ones that lead to weak ergodicity breaking phenomena of
Hilbert space fragmentation and quantum many-body scars. In addition, we show
that this super-Hamiltonian is exactly the superoperator that governs the
operator relaxation in noisy symmetric Brownian circuits. This physical
interpretation provides a novel interpretation for Mazur bounds for
autocorrelation functions, and relates the low-energy excitations of the
super-Hamiltonian to approximate symmetries that determine slowly relaxing
modes in symmetric systems. We find examples of gapped/gapless
super-Hamiltonians indicating the absence/presence of slow-modes, which happens
in the presence of discrete/continuous symmetries. In the gapless cases, we
recover slow-modes such as diffusion, tracer diffusion, and asymptotic scars in
the presence of $U(1)$ symmetry, Hilbert space fragmentation, and a tower of
quantum scars respectively. In all, this demonstrates the power of the
commutant algebra framework in obtaining a comprehensive understanding of
symmetries and their dynamical consequences in systems with locality.


Category: hep-th
Title: Symmetries as Ground States of Local Superoperators
Authors: Sanjay Moudgalya, Olexei I. Motrunich
Date: 2023-09-26T18:03:24Z
Abstract:   Symmetry algebras of quantum many-body systems with locality can be
understood using commutant algebras, which are defined as algebras of operators
that commute with a given set of local operators. In this work, we show that
these symmetry algebras can be expressed as frustration-free ground states of a
local superoperator, which we refer to as a "super-Hamiltonian". We demonstrate
this for conventional symmetries such as $Z_2$, $U(1)$, and $SU(2)$, where the
symmetry algebras map to various kinds of ferromagnetic ground states, as well
as for unconventional ones that lead to weak ergodicity breaking phenomena of
Hilbert space fragmentation and quantum many-body scars. In addition, we show
that this super-Hamiltonian is exactly the superoperator that governs the
operator relaxation in noisy symmetric Brownian circuits. This physical
interpretation provides a novel interpretation for Mazur bounds for
autocorrelation functions, and relates the low-energy excitations of the
super-Hamiltonian to approximate symmetries that determine slowly relaxing
modes in symmetric systems. We find examples of gapped/gapless
super-Hamiltonians indicating the absence/presence of slow-modes, which happens
in the presence of discrete/continuous symmetries. In the gapless cases, we
recover slow-modes such as diffusion, tracer diffusion, and asymptotic scars in
the presence of $U(1)$ symmetry, Hilbert space fragmentation, and a tower of
quantum scars respectively. In all, this demonstrates the power of the
commutant algebra framework in obtaining a comprehensive understanding of
symmetries and their dynamical consequences in systems with locality.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum tensor networks algorithms for evaluation of spectral functions
  on quantum computers
Authors: Michael L. Wall, Aidan Reilly, John S. Van Dyke, Collin Broholm, Paraj Titum
Date: 2023-09-26T18:01:42Z
Abstract:   We investigate quantum algorithms derived from tensor networks to simulate
the static and dynamic properties of quantum many-body systems. Using a
sequentially prepared quantum circuit representation of a matrix product state
(MPS) that we call a quantum tensor network (QTN), we demonstrate algorithms to
prepare ground and excited states on a quantum computer and apply them to
molecular nanomagnets (MNMs) as a paradigmatic example. In this setting, we
develop two approaches for extracting the spectral correlation functions
measured in neutron scattering experiments: (a) a generalization of the SWAP
test for computing wavefunction overlaps and, (b) a generalization of the
notion of matrix product operators (MPOs) to the QTN setting which generates a
linear combination of unitaries. The latter method is discussed in detail for
translationally invariant spin-half systems, where it is shown to reduce the
qubit resource requirements compared with the SWAP method, and may be
generalized to other systems. We demonstrate the versatility of our approaches
by simulating spin-1/2 and spin-3/2 MNMs, with the latter being an
experimentally relevant model of a Cr$^{3+}_8$ ring. Our approach has qubit
requirements that are independent of the number of constituents of the
many-body system and scale only logarithmically with the bond dimension of the
MPS representation, making them appealing for implementation on near-term
quantum hardware with mid-circuit measurement and reset.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Integer Factorization through Func-QAOA
Authors: Mostafa Atallah, Haemanth Velmurugan, Rohan Sharma, Siddhant Midha, Shamim Al Mamun, Ludmila Botelho, Adam Glos, Özlem Salehi
Date: 2023-09-26T18:00:25Z
Abstract:   Integer factorization is a significant problem, with implications for the
security of widely-used cryptographic schemes. No efficient classical algorithm
for polynomial-time integer factorization has been found despite extensive
research. Although Peter Shor's breakthrough quantum algorithm offers a viable
solution, current limitations of noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)
computers hinder its practical implementation. To address this, researchers
have explored alternative methods for factorization suitable for NISQ devices.
One such method is the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm, which treats
factoring as an optimization problem defined over binary bits, resulting in
various problematic aspects. In this paper, we explore the Func-QAOA approach
for factorization, which premises overcoming some of the limitations of
previous approaches and allows the incorporation of more advanced factorization
techniques. After reviewing the most promising quantum implementations for
integer arithmetics, we present a few illustrative examples to demonstrate the
efficacy of the Func-QAOA approach and discuss methods to reduce the search
space to speed up the optimization process.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Anomalous Linear and Quadratic Nodeless Surface Dirac Cones in
  Three-Dimensional Dirac Semimetals
Authors: Dongling Liu, Xiao-Jiao Wang, Yijie Mo, Zhongbo Yan
Date: 2023-09-26T18:00:04Z
Abstract:   Surface Dirac cones in three-dimensional topological insulators have
generated tremendous and enduring interest for almost two decades owing to
hosting a multitude of exotic properties. In this work, we explore the
topological surface states in two representative types of three-dimensional
Dirac semimetals, and unveil the existence of two types of anomalous surface
Dirac cones on the largely overlooked surfaces where the projections of bulk
Dirac nodes overlap. These surface Dirac cones are found to display a number of
features remarkably different from that in topological insulators. The most
prominent one is the absence of Dirac node in them. In addition, the spin
textures of these nodeless surface Dirac cones are found to exhibit a unique
two-phase-angle dependence, leading to the presence of two different winding
numbers in the orbital-resolved spin textures, which is rather different from
the well-known spin-momentum locking in topological insulators. Despite the
absence of Dirac node, we find that the surface Dirac cones are also
characterized by quantized $\pi$ Berry phases, even though one type of the
surface Dirac cones takes a quadratic dispersion. In the presence of
time-reversal-symmetry-breaking fields, we find that the responses of the
surface and bulk Dirac cones display an interesting bulk-surface
correspondence. The uncovering of these nodeless surface Dirac cones broadens
our understanding of the topological surface states and bulk-boundary
correspondence in Dirac semimetals, and could further fuel the research
interest in Dirac physics.


Category: hep-th
Title: On the String Landscape Without Hypermultiplets
Authors: Zihni Kaan Baykara, Yuta Hamada, Houri-Christina Tarazi, Cumrun Vafa
Date: 2023-09-26T18:00:03Z
Abstract:   In this work we study interesting corners of the quantum gravity landscape
with 8 supercharges pushing the boundaries of our current understanding.
Calabi-Yau threefolds compactifications of F/M/type II theories to 6, 5 and 4
dimensions are the most prominent examples of this class, and these always lead
to a universal hypermultiplet coming from the volume/string coupling constant.
We find that there are asymmetric orbifold constructions which have no
hypermultiplets in 4 or 5 dimensions and no neutral hypers in 6d. We argue that
these theories can also be obtained by going to strong coupling/small volume
regions of geometric constructions where a new Coulomb branch opens up and
moving in this direction freezes the volume/string coupling constant.
Interestingly we find that the Kodaira condition encountered in geometric
limits of F-theory compactifications to 6 dimensions is violated in these
corners of the landscape due to strong quantum corrections. We also construct a
theory in 3 dimensions which if it were to arise by toroidal compactifications
from 5d, it would have to come from pure ${\mathcal N}=1$ supergravity with no
massless scalar fields.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Holographic Entropy Inequalities and the Topology of Entanglement Wedge
  Nesting
Authors: Bartlomiej Czech, Sirui Shuai, Yixu Wang, Daiming Zhang
Date: 2023-09-26T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We prove two new infinite families of holographic entropy inequalities. A key
tool is a graphical arrangement of terms of inequalities, which is based on
entanglement wedge nesting (EWN). It associates the inequalities with
tessellations of the torus and the projective plane, which reflect a certain
topological aspect of EWN. The inequalities prove a prior conjecture about the
structure of the holographic entropy cone and show an interesting interplay
with differential entropy.


Category: hep-th
Title: Holographic Entropy Inequalities and the Topology of Entanglement Wedge
  Nesting
Authors: Bartlomiej Czech, Sirui Shuai, Yixu Wang, Daiming Zhang
Date: 2023-09-26T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We prove two new infinite families of holographic entropy inequalities. A key
tool is a graphical arrangement of terms of inequalities, which is based on
entanglement wedge nesting (EWN). It associates the inequalities with
tessellations of the torus and the projective plane, which reflect a certain
topological aspect of EWN. The inequalities prove a prior conjecture about the
structure of the holographic entropy cone and show an interesting interplay
with differential entropy.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gravitational Production of Spin-3/2 Particles During Reheating
Authors: Kunio Kaneta, Wenqi Ke, Yann Mambrini, Keith A. Olive, Sarunas Verner
Date: 2023-09-26T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We compute the density of a spin-$\frac32$ particle, the raritron, produced
at the end of inflation due to gravitational interactions. We consider a
background inflaton condensate as the source of this production, mediated by
the exchange of a graviton. This production greatly exceeds the gravitational
production from the emergent thermal bath during reheating. The relic abundance
limit sets an absolute minimum mass for a stable raritron, though there are
also model dependent constraints imposed by unitarity. We also examine the case
of gravitational production of a gravitino, taking into account the goldstino
evolution during reheating. We compare these results with conventional
gravitino production mechanisms.


Category: hep-th
Title: Classification of symmetry-enriched topological quantum spin liquids
Authors: Weicheng Ye, Liujun Zou
Date: 2023-09-26T17:59:58Z
Abstract:   We present a systematic framework to classify symmetry-enriched topological
quantum spin liquids in two spatial dimensions. This framework can deal with
all topological quantum spin liquids, which may be either Abelian or
non-Abelian, chiral or non-chiral. It can systematically treat a general
symmetry, which may include both lattice symmetry and internal symmetry, may
contain anti-unitary symmetry, and may permute anyons. The framework applies to
all types of lattices, and can systematically distinguish different lattice
systems with the same symmetry group using their Lieb-Schultz-Mattis anomalies.
We apply this framework to classify $U(1)_{2N}$ chiral states and non-Abelian
Ising$^{(\nu)}$ states enriched by a $p6\times SO(3)$ or $p4\times SO(3)$
symmetry, and $\mathbb{Z}_N$ topological orders and $U(1)_{2N}\times
U(1)_{-2N}$ topological orders enriched by a $p6m\times
SO(3)\times\mathbb{Z}_2^T$, $p4m\times SO(3)\times\mathbb{Z}_2^T$,
$p6m\times\mathbb{Z}_2^T$ or $p4m\times\mathbb{Z}_2^T$ symmetry, where $p6$,
$p4$, $p6m$ and $p4m$ are lattice symmetries, while $SO(3)$ and
$\mathbb{Z}_2^T$ are spin rotation and time reversal symmetries, respectively.
In particular, we identify symmetry-enriched topological quantum spin liquids
that are not easily captured by the usual parton-mean-field approach, including
examples with the familiar $\mathbb{Z}_2$ topological order.


Category: quant-ph
Title: AdS$_3$ Vacuum State from Four Minkowski Vacuum States
Authors: Lucas Kocia Kovalsky
Date: 2023-09-26T17:54:49Z
Abstract:   We show that a tensor product of four specific $1{+}2$ Minkowski vacuum
states is a self-consistent vacuum state for an infinite set of
three-dimensional anti-de Sitter spacetimes, which consist of all non-zero
scalar curvatures without parity or time-reversal symmetry.


Category: hep-th
Title: AdS$_3$ Vacuum State from Four Minkowski Vacuum States
Authors: Lucas Kocia Kovalsky
Date: 2023-09-26T17:54:49Z
Abstract:   We show that a tensor product of four specific $1{+}2$ Minkowski vacuum
states is a self-consistent vacuum state for an infinite set of
three-dimensional anti-de Sitter spacetimes, which consist of all non-zero
scalar curvatures without parity or time-reversal symmetry.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum geodesic flow on the integer lattice line
Authors: Edwin Beggs, Shahn Majid
Date: 2023-09-26T17:51:39Z
Abstract:   We use a recent formalism of quantum geodesics in noncommutative geometry to
construct geodesic flow on the infinite chain
$\cdots\bullet$--$\bullet$--$\bullet\cdots$. We find that noncommutative
effects due to the discretisation of the line cause an initially real geodesic
flow amplitude $\psi$ (for which the density is $|\psi|^2$) to become complex.
This has been noted also for other quantum geometries and suggests that the
complex nature of the wave function in quantum mechanics (and the interference
effects that follow) may have its origin in a quantum/discrete nature of
spacetime at the Planck scale.


Category: quant-ph
Title: SuperGaN: Synthesis of NbTiN/GaN/NbTiN Tunnel Junctions
Authors: Michael Cyberey, Scott Hinton, Christopher Moore, Robert M. Weikle, Arthur Lichtenberger
Date: 2023-09-26T17:50:17Z
Abstract:   Nb-based circuits have broad applications in quantum-limited photon
detectors, low-noise parametric amplifiers, superconducting digital logic
circuits, and low-loss circuits for quantum computing. The current
state-of-the-art approach for superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS)
junction material is the Gurvitch trilayer process based on magnetron
sputtering of Nb electrodes with Al-Oxide or AlN tunnel barriers grown on an Al
overlayer. However, a current limitation of elemental Nb-based circuits is the
low-loss operation of THz circuits operating above the 670 GHz gap frequency of
Nb and operation at higher temperatures for projects with a strict power
budget, such as space-based applications.
  NbTiN is an alternative higher energy gap material and we have previously
reported on the first NbTiN/AlN/NbTiN
superconducting-insulating-superconducting (SIS) junctions with an epitaxially
grown AlN tunnel barrier. One drawback of a directly grown tunnel barrier
compared to thermal oxidation or plasma nitridation is control of the barrier
thickness and uniformity across a substrate, leading to variations in current
density (Jc). Semiconductor barriers with smaller barrier heights enable
thicker tunnel barriers for a given Jc. GaN is an alternative semiconductor
material with a closed-packed Wurtzite crystal structure similar to AlN and it
can be epitaxially grown as a tunnel barrier using the Reactive Bias Target Ion
Beam Deposition (RBTIBD) technique. This work presents the preliminary results
of the first reported high-quality NbTiN/GaN/NbTiN heterojunctions with
underdamped SIS I(V) characteristics.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Fine structure splitting cancellation in highly asymmetric InAs/InP
  droplet epitaxy quantum dots
Authors: N. R. S. van Venrooij, A. R. da Cruz, R. S. R. Gajjella, P. M. Koenraad, Craig E. Pryor, Michael E. Flatté
Date: 2023-09-26T16:45:03Z
Abstract:   We find the single exciton's fine structure splitting (FSS), which splits its
degenerate ground state manifold into singlets, nearly vanishes in highly
asymmetric quantum dots due to the cancellation of splitting effects with
markedly different origin. The dots simulated are those that emerge on top of
etch pits through the droplet epitaxy growth process; these etch pit dots break
square ($C_{4v}$) spatial symmetry, which has been previously associated with
small FSS. Configuration interaction calculations predict a vanishing FSS at a
specific finite etch pit displacement from the center of the dot, for a
structure far from square symmetry. We thus predict that highly asymmetric
quantum dots may still display negligible fine structure splitting, providing
new avenues for high-fidelity generation of indistinguishable, polarization
entangled photon pairs on demand.


Category: hep-th
Title: An Elliptic One-Loop Amplitude in Anti-de-Sitter Space
Authors: Sven F. Stawinski
Date: 2023-09-26T16:39:04Z
Abstract:   We present full analytic results for the four-point one-loop amplitude of a
conformally coupled scalar in four-dimensional Anti-de-Sitter space dual to a
primary operator with scaling dimension 1. The computation is based on an
intriguing recent discovery, connecting Witten diagrams and flat-space Feynman
integrals, which led to an expression of the amplitude of interest as a pure
combination of single-valued multiple polylogarithms and an integral which
cannot be reduced to multiple polylogarithms. We explicitly evaluate that
integral in terms of elliptic multiple polylogarithms, finding that it is not
manifestly single-valued unlike the polylogarithmic contributions to the
amplitude. Further we compute the symbol of the integral and observe similar
structures as for (elliptic) flat-space amplitudes. The result presented here
adds to the relatively short list of explicitly known position space
curved-space amplitudes beyond tree level, and constitutes the first
curved-space amplitude evaluated in terms of elliptic multiple polylogarithms.


Category: quant-ph
Title: QUILT: Effective Multi-Class Classification on Quantum Computers Using
  an Ensemble of Diverse Quantum Classifiers
Authors: Daniel Silver, Tirthak Patel, Devesh Tiwari
Date: 2023-09-26T16:36:11Z
Abstract:   Quantum computers can theoretically have significant acceleration over
classical computers; but, the near-future era of quantum computing is limited
due to small number of qubits that are also error prone. Quilt is a framework
for performing multi-class classification task designed to work effectively on
current error-prone quantum computers. Quilt is evaluated with real quantum
machines as well as with projected noise levels as quantum machines become more
noise-free. Quilt demonstrates up to 85% multi-class classification accuracy
with the MNIST dataset on a five-qubit system.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Room-temperature quantum optomechanics using an ultra-low noise cavity
Authors: Guanhao Huang, Alberto Beccari, Nils J. Engelsen, Tobias J. Kippenberg
Date: 2023-09-26T16:27:32Z
Abstract:   Ponderomotive squeezing of light, where a mechanical oscillator creates
quantum correlations between the phase and amplitude of the interacting light
field, is a canonical signature of the quantum regime of optomechanics. At room
temperature, this has only been reached in pioneering experiments where an
optical restoring force controls the oscillator stiffness, akin to the
vibrational motion of atoms in an optical lattice. These include both levitated
nanoparticles and optically-trapped cantilevers. Recent advances in engineered
mechanical resonators, where the restoring force is provided by material
rigidity rather than an external optical potential, have realized ultra-high
quality factors (Q) by exploiting `soft clamping'. However entering the quantum
regime with such resonators, has so far been prevented by optical cavity
frequency fluctuations and thermal intermodulation noise. Here, we overcome
this challenge and demonstrate optomechanical squeezing at room temperature in
a phononic-engineered membrane-in-the-middle system. By using a high finesse
cavity whose mirrors are patterned with phononic crystal structures, we reduce
cavity frequency noise by more than 700-fold. In this ultra-low noise cavity,
we introduce a silicon nitride membrane oscillator whose density is modulated
by silicon nano-pillars, yielding both high thermal conductance and a localized
mechanical mode with Q of 1.8e8. These advances enable operation within a
factor of 2.5 of the Heisenberg limit, leading to squeezing of the probing
field by 1.09 dB below the vacuum fluctuations. Moreover, the long thermal
decoherence time of the membrane oscillator (more than 30 vibrational periods)
allows us to obtain conditional displaced thermal states of motion with an
occupation of 0.97 phonon, using a multimode Kalman filter. Our work extends
quantum control of engineered macroscopic oscillators to room temperature.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Steering vs Entanglement and Extracting Work in an Anisotropic
  Two-Qubit Heisenberg Model in Presence of External Magnetic Fields with DM
  and KSEA Interactions
Authors: Mohamed Amazioug, Mohammed Daoud
Date: 2023-09-26T16:03:38Z
Abstract:   We examine the Dzyaloshinski-Moriya (DM) and
Kaplan-Shekhtman-Entin-Wohlman-Aharony (KSEA) interactions in thermal
equilibrium submitted to the anisotropic Heisenberg two-qubit model in an
inhomogeneous magnetic field. The steerability between the two qubits is
evaluated using quantum steering. The concurrence serves as a witness to
quantum entanglement. Both the extracted work and the ideal efficiency of the
two qubits are quantified. We discuss how quantum correlations behave in
relation to the bath's temperature and the
Kaplan-Shekhtman-Entin-Wohlman-Aharony coupling parameter. We find that the
nonclassical correlations in a two-qubit Heisenberg XYZ Model are fragile under
thermal effects. Nevertheless, the results indicate that the concurrence is
stronger than quantum steering under thermal effects. We obtained that an
extraction of work is comparable with the bare energies.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Measurement-induced phase transition in a single-body tight-binding
  model
Authors: Tony Jin, David G. Martin
Date: 2023-09-26T16:03:09Z
Abstract:   We study the statistical properties of a single free quantum particle
evolving coherently on a discrete lattice in $d$ spatial dimensions where every
lattice site is additionally subject to continuous measurement of the
occupation number. Using perturbative renormalization group (RG) analysis, we
show that the systems undergoes a Measurement-induced Phase Transition (MiPT)
for $d>2$ from a $\textit{delocalized}$ to a $\textit{localized}$ phase as the
measurement strength $\gamma$ is increased beyond a critical value
$\gamma_{c}$. In the language of surface growth, the delocalized phase
corresponds to a $\textit{rough}$ phase while the localized phase corresponds
to a $\textit{smooth}$ phase. We support our analytical computations with
numerical analysis which are in qualitative and quantitative agreement with the
theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A note on relativistic entanglement
Authors: Saulo Carneiro
Date: 2023-09-26T15:54:07Z
Abstract:   I discuss the time evolution of quantum entanglement in presence of
non-collapsing interactions. In the case of relativistic systems, the
correlation between entangled processes is defined by the equality of the
correspondent invariant intervals. As an example, the entanglement between the
products of a particle decay is revisited, leading to correlations in precise
agreement with the muon $g-2$ experimental results. The extension of such a
postulate to the curved space-time is also used to discuss the survival of
entanglement in the presence of horizons.


Category: hep-th
Title: A note on relativistic entanglement
Authors: Saulo Carneiro
Date: 2023-09-26T15:54:07Z
Abstract:   I discuss the time evolution of quantum entanglement in presence of
non-collapsing interactions. In the case of relativistic systems, the
correlation between entangled processes is defined by the equality of the
correspondent invariant intervals. As an example, the entanglement between the
products of a particle decay is revisited, leading to correlations in precise
agreement with the muon $g-2$ experimental results. The extension of such a
postulate to the curved space-time is also used to discuss the survival of
entanglement in the presence of horizons.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum Cosmology and Black Hole Interiors in Nonsupersymmetric String
  Theory and Canonical Gravity
Authors: Michael McGuigan
Date: 2023-09-26T15:41:24Z
Abstract:   In this paper we study black hole interior solutions and cosmologies in
different dimensions using tools from canonical gravity and nonsupersymmetric
string quantum cosmology. We find that the quantum wave functions associated
with these solutions can be related to each other by a specific choice of
variables. In a more realistic four dimensional setting we combine canonical
gravity and nonsupersymmetric string orbifold compactifications. We discuss the
classical solutions and the corresponding wave functions involving inflation,
the Higgs field, dark matter and hidden gauge sectors in these models. Finally
we discuss string aspects of these models such as duality, massive modes, and
nonperturbative approaches such as Matrix theory and holography near the
singularity.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Efficient adaptive Bayesian estimation of a slowly fluctuating
  Overhauser field gradient
Authors: Jacob Benestad, Jan A. Krzywda, Evert van Nieuwenburg, Jeroen Danon
Date: 2023-09-26T15:34:33Z
Abstract:   Slow fluctuations of Overhauser fields are an important source for
decoherence in spin qubits hosted in III-V semiconductor quantum dots. Focusing
on the effect of the field gradient on double-dot singlet-triplet qubits, we
present two adaptive Bayesian schemes to estimate the magnitude of the gradient
by a series of free induction decay experiments. We concentrate on reducing the
computational overhead, with a real-time implementation of the schemes in mind.
We show how it is possible to achieve a significant improvement of estimation
accuracy compared to more traditional estimation methods. We include an
analysis of the effects of dephasing and the drift of the gradient itself.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Percolation-induced PT symmetry breaking
Authors: Mengjie Yang, Ching Hua Lee
Date: 2023-09-26T15:27:10Z
Abstract:   We propose a new avenue in which percolation, which has been much associated
with critical phase transitions, can also dictate the asymptotic dynamics of
non-Hermitian systems by breaking PT symmetry. Central to it is our
newly-designed mechanism of topologically guided gain, where chiral edge
wavepackets in a bilayer topological system experience non-Hermitian gain or
loss based on how they are topologically steered. For sufficiently wide
topological islands, this leads to irreversible growth due to positive feedback
from inter-layer tunneling. As such, a percolation transition that merges small
topo islands into larger ones also drives the edge spectrum across a real to
complex transition. Our discovery showcases intriguing dynamical consequences
from the triple interplay of chiral topology, directed gain and inter-layer
tunneling, and suggests new routes for topology to be harnessed in the control
of feedback systems.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quasilocal Corrections to Bondi's Mass-Loss Formula and Dynamical
  Horizons
Authors: Albert Huber
Date: 2023-09-26T15:21:09Z
Abstract:   In this work, a null geometric approach to the Brown-York quasilocal
formalism is used to derive an integral law that describes the rate of change
of mass and/or radiative energy escaping through a dynamical horizon of a
non-stationary spacetime. The result thus obtained shows - in accordance with
previous results from the theory of dynamical horizons of Ashtekar et al. -
that the rate at which energy is transferred from the bulk to the boundary of
spacetime through the dynamical horizon becomes zero at equilibrium, where said
horizon becomes non-expanding and null. Moreover, it reveals previously
unrecognized quasilocal corrections to the Bondi mass-loss formula arising from
the combined variation of bulk and boundary components of the Brown-York
Hamiltonian, given in terms of a bulk-to-boundary inflow term akin to an
expression derived in an earlier paper by the author [#huber2022remark]. For
clarity, this is discussed with reference to the Generalized Vaidya family of
spacetimes, for which derived integral expressions take a particularly simple
form.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Statistical Analysis of Quantum State Learning Process in Quantum Neural
  Networks
Authors: Hao-kai Zhang, Chenghong Zhu, Mingrui Jing, Xin Wang
Date: 2023-09-26T14:54:50Z
Abstract:   Quantum neural networks (QNNs) have been a promising framework in pursuing
near-term quantum advantage in various fields, where many applications can be
viewed as learning a quantum state that encodes useful data. As a quantum
analog of probability distribution learning, quantum state learning is
theoretically and practically essential in quantum machine learning. In this
paper, we develop a no-go theorem for learning an unknown quantum state with
QNNs even starting from a high-fidelity initial state. We prove that when the
loss value is lower than a critical threshold, the probability of avoiding
local minima vanishes exponentially with the qubit count, while only grows
polynomially with the circuit depth. The curvature of local minima is
concentrated to the quantum Fisher information times a loss-dependent constant,
which characterizes the sensibility of the output state with respect to
parameters in QNNs. These results hold for any circuit structures,
initialization strategies, and work for both fixed ansatzes and adaptive
methods. Extensive numerical simulations are performed to validate our
theoretical results. Our findings place generic limits on good initial guesses
and adaptive methods for improving the learnability and scalability of QNNs,
and deepen the understanding of prior information's role in QNNs.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Long-distance chronometric leveling with a transportable optical clock
Authors: J. Grotti, I. Nosske, S. B. Koller, S. Herbers, H. Denker, L. Timmen, G. Vishnyakova, G. Grosche, T. Waterholter, A. Kuhl, S. Koke, E. Benkler, M. Giunta, L. Maisenbacher, A. Matveev, S. Dörscher, R. Schwarz, A. Al-Masoudi, T. W. Hänsch, T. H. Udem, R. Holzwarth, C. Lisdat
Date: 2023-09-26T14:12:07Z
Abstract:   We have measured the geopotential difference between two locations separated
by 457 km by comparison of two optical lattice clocks via an interferometric
fiber link, utilizing the gravitational redshift of the clock transition
frequency. The $^{87}$Sr clocks have been compared side-by-side before and
after one of the clocks was moved to the remote location. The chronometrically
measured geopotential difference of $3918.1(2.4)\,\mathrm{m^2 \, s^{-2}}$
agrees with an independent geodetic determination of
$3915.88(0.30)\,\mathrm{m^2 \, s^{-2}}$. The uncertainty of the chronometric
geopotential difference is equivalent to an uncertainty of $24~\mathrm{cm}$ in
height.


Category: hep-th
Title: FLPR Model: Nilpotent (Anti-)co-BRST Symmetries
Authors: R. P. Malik
Date: 2023-09-26T14:08:22Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate the existence of a set of novel off-shell nilpotent and
absolutely anticommuting continuous symmetry transformations, within the
framework of the Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) formalism, which are over and
above the usual off-shell nilpotent and absolutely anticommuting (anti-)BRST
symmetry transformations that are respected by the first-order Lagrangian for
the Friedberg-Lee-Pang-Ren (FLPR) model that describes the motion of a
non-relativistic particle of unit mass moving under the influence of a general
rotationally invariant spatial two-dimensional potential. We christen these
novel set of fermionic symmetry transformations as the (anti-)co-BRST symmetry
transformations because the gauge-fixing term remains invariant under them. We
derive the conserved and off-shell nilpotent (anti-)BRST and (anti-)co-BRST
charges and comment on the physicality criteria w.r.t. them where we establish
the presence of the operator forms of the first-class constraints (of the
original classical gauge theory) at the quantum level.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Search with Noisy Oracle
Authors: Ansis Rosmanis
Date: 2023-09-26T14:00:23Z
Abstract:   We consider quantum search algorithms that have access to a noisy oracle
that, for every oracle call, with probability $p>0$ completely depolarizes the
query registers, while otherwise working properly. Previous results had not
ruled out quantum $\mathrm{O}(\sqrt{n})$-query algorithms in this setting, even
for constant $p$. We show that, for all $p\le 0.99$, the quantum noisy-query
complexity of the unstructured search is $\tilde\Theta(\max\{np,\sqrt{n}\})$.
The lower bound $\Omega(\max\{np,\sqrt n\})$ holds also for the dephasing noise
and even when, for every oracle call, the algorithm is provided with a flag
indicating whether the error has occurred.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Investigating Parameter Trainability in the SNAP-Displacement Protocol
  of a Qudit system
Authors: Oluwadara Ogunkoya, Kirsten Morris, Doga Murat Kürkçüoglu
Date: 2023-09-26T13:57:40Z
Abstract:   In this study, we explore the universality of Selective Number-dependent
Arbitrary Phase (SNAP) and Displacement gates for quantum control in
qudit-based systems. However, optimizing the parameters of these gates poses a
challenging task. Our main focus is to investigate the sensitivity of training
any of the SNAP parameters in the SNAP-Displacement protocol. We analyze
conditions that could potentially lead to the Barren Plateau problem in a qudit
system and draw comparisons with multi-qubit systems. The parameterized ansatz
we consider consists of blocks, where each block is composed of hardware
operations, namely SNAP and Displacement gates \cite{fosel2020efficient}.
Applying Variational Quantum Algorithm (VQA) with observable and gate cost
functions, we utilize techniques similar to those in \cite{mcclean2018barren}
and \cite{cerezo2021cost} along with the concept of $t-$design. Through this
analysis, we make the following key observations: (a) The trainability of a
SNAP-parameter does not exhibit a preference for any particular direction
within our cost function landscape, (b) By leveraging the first and second
moments properties of Haar measures, we establish new lemmas concerning the
expectation of certain polynomial functions, and (c) utilizing these new
lemmas, we identify a general condition that indicates an expected trainability
advantage in a qudit system when compared to multi-qubit systems.


Category: hep-th
Title: Factorization of covariant Feynman graphs for the effective action
Authors: Gero von Gersdorff
Date: 2023-09-26T13:52:26Z
Abstract:   We prove a neat factorization property of Feynman graphs in covariant
perturbation theory. The contribution of the graph to the effective action is
written as a product of a massless scalar momentum integral that only depends
on the basic graph topology, and a background-field dependent piece that
contains all the information of spin, gauge representations, masses etc. We
give a closed expression for the momentum integral in terms of four graph
polynomials whose properties we derive in some detail. Our results can also be
useful for standard (non-covariant) perturbation theory.


Category: hep-th
Title: Doped Holographic Superconductors in Gubser-Rocha model
Authors: Ziyi Zhao, Wenhe Cai, Shuta Ishigaki
Date: 2023-09-26T11:30:56Z
Abstract:   We construct a doped holographic superconductor in the Gubser-Rocha model,
and realize a superconducting dome in the middle of the temperature-doping
phase diagram. From the numerical observation for the coupling dependence of
the phase diagram, we find that the coupling between the two gauge fields plays
a crucial role in the formation of dome. We also analytically calculate the DC
conductivity of the normal phase of the system in the momentum dissipation,
which is proportional to temperature. The AC conductivity is calculated
numerically. There is a symmetry between $\sigma_A$, $\sigma_B$ and $\gamma$
with specific doping parameter x in normal phase, and this symmetry continues
to exist with the momentum dissipation.


Category: quant-ph
Title: On character table of Clifford groups
Authors: Chin-Yen Lee, Wei-Hsuan Yu, Yung-Ning Peng, Ching-Jui Lai
Date: 2023-09-26T11:29:35Z
Abstract:   Based on a presentation of $\mathcal{C}_n$ and the help of [GAP], we
construct the character table of the Clifford group $\mathcal{C}_n$ for
$n=1,2,3$. As an application, we can efficiently decompose the (higher power
of) tensor product of the matrix representation in those cases. Our results
recover some known results in [HWW, WF] and reveal some new phenomena. We prove
that the trivial character is the only linear character for $\mathcal{C}_n$ and
hence $\mathcal{C}_n$ equals to its commutator subgroup when $n\geq 3$. A few
conjectures about $\mathcal{C}_n$ for general $n$ are proposed.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Rydberg-atom graphs for quadratic unconstrained binary optimization
  problems
Authors: Andrew Byun, Junwoo Jung, Kangheun Kim, Minhyuk Kim, Seokho Jeong, Heejeong Jeong, Jaewook Ahn
Date: 2023-09-26T11:22:38Z
Abstract:   There is a growing interest in harnessing the potential of the Rydberg-atom
system to address complex combinatorial optimization challenges. Here we
present an experimental demonstration of how the quadratic unconstrained binary
optimization (QUBO) problem can be effectively addressed using Rydberg-atom
graphs. The Rydberg-atom graphs are configurations of neutral atoms organized
into mathematical graphs, facilitated by programmable optical tweezers, and
designed to exhibit many-body ground states that correspond to the maximum
independent set (MIS) of their respective graphs. We have developed four
elementary Rydberg-atom subgraph components, not only to eliminate the need of
local control but also to be robust against interatomic distance errors, while
serving as the building blocks sufficient for formulating generic QUBO graphs.
To validate the feasibility of our approach, we have conducted a series of
Rydberg-atom experiments selected to demonstrate proof-of-concept operations of
these building blocks. These experiments illustrate how these components can be
used to programmatically encode the QUBO problems to Rydberg-atom graphs and,
by measuring their many-body ground states, how their QUBO solutions are
determined subsequently.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Timing the moment when atom decays (and Schroedinger's cat dies)
Authors: D. Sokolovski, A. Uranga, E. Akhmatskaya
Date: 2023-09-26T10:46:14Z
Abstract:   We propose detecting the moment an atom emits a photon by means of a nearly
classical macroscopic clock and discuss its viability. It is shown that what
happens in such a measurement depends on the relation between the clock's
accuracy and the width of the energy range available to the photon.
Implications of the analysis for the long standing Schroedinger's cat problem
are reported.


Category: hep-th
Title: Manifestly covariant variational principle for gauge theories of gravity
Authors: Michael Hobson, Anthony Lasenby, Will Barker
Date: 2023-09-26T09:31:29Z
Abstract:   A variational principle for gauge theories of gravity is presented, which
maintains manifest covariance under the symmetries to which the action is
invariant, throughout the calculation of the equations of motion and
conservation laws. This is performed by deriving explicit manifestly covariant
expressions for the Euler--Lagrange variational derivatives and Noether's
theorems for a generic action of the form typically assumed in gauge theories
of gravity. The approach is illustrated by application to two scale-invariant
gravitational gauge theories, namely Weyl gauge theory (WGT) and the recently
proposed `extended' Weyl gauge theory (eWGT), where the latter may be
considered as a novel gauging of the conformal group, but the method can be
straightforwardly applied to other theories with smaller or larger symmetry
groups. The approach also enables one easily to establish the relationship
between manifestly covariant forms of variational derivatives obtained when one
or more of the gauge field strengths is set to zero either before or after the
variation is performed. This is illustrated explicitly for both WGT and eWGT in
the case where the translational gauge field strength (or torsion) is set to
zero before and after performing the variation, respectively.


Category: hep-th
Title: Relativistic hydrodynamics with phase transition
Authors: F. Taghinavaz
Date: 2023-09-26T09:16:39Z
Abstract:   Examining the validity of hydrodynamics series near the phase transition
points is of great importance either in the theoretical or phenomenological
point of view. We investigate this in the framework of gauge/gravity duality by
using the Einstein-Klein-Gordon model which is a bottom-up string theory
construction and a parameter $B_4$ in this model is responsible for mimicking
the various kinds of phase transition of the strongly coupled field theory that
lives on the boundary. We study both the thermodynamics and dynamics of
time-dependent linearized perturbations on top of this background for the
spin-2, spin-1 and spin-0 sectors of perturbations extensively. We observe that
the paradigm "{\it{breakdown of the hydrodynamic series near the transition
points}}" seems to be (not true, true, not true) for the (crossover,
second-order, first-order) phase transitions. We also observe that the
high-temperature and low-temperature limits of the $q^2_c$ (the radius of
convergence of the hydrodynamic series) are equal which can be a sign of the
same equality for using the low-momentum expansions. Moreover, we observe that
the relation $ (\text{Max} |q^2|_c )_{\text{spin-2}} < (\text{Max} |q^2|_c
)_{\text{spin-0}} < (\text{Max} |q^2|_c )_{\text{spin-1}}$ does hold between
the different spin sectors irrespective of the kinds of phase transition. We
find that at the chaos point, the phenomenon of pole-skipping emerges for
gravity perturbations as well as for scalar perturbations at $\omega_n = - 2
\pi T n i$. Also, we compare the chaos momentum with $q^2_c$ and find $q^2_{ps}
< q^2_c$ except at very high temperatures.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum gravity in JNW spacetime
Authors: Enrique Alvarez, Jesus Anero
Date: 2023-09-26T08:22:13Z
Abstract:   In this paper we study the behavior of a scalar field coupled to gravitons on
the Janis-Newman-Winicour background, which somewhat interpolates between
Minkowski and Schwarzschild space-times. The most important physical effect we
find is that there is a 17-dimensional position-dependent mass matrix YABpxq
which happens to be non-diagonal in the basis in which the kinetic energy term
is diagonal. There is a different basis with a mixing between the scalar field
and the graviton trace in which the mass matrix is diagonal, but this basis
fails to diagonalize the kinetic energy piece. This is at variance with what
happens in the Standard Model with the quark mixing, and is of course due to
the fact that the mass matrix here is position dependent and thus it does not
commute with the kinetic energy operator, so that both operators cannot be
diagonalized simultaneously.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Scale-dependent heat transport in dissipative media via electromagnetic
  fluctuations
Authors: Matthias Krüger, Kiryl Asheichyk, Mehran Kardar, Ramin Golestanian
Date: 2023-09-26T07:35:28Z
Abstract:   We develop a theory for heat transport via electromagnetic waves inside
media, and use it to derive a spatially nonlocal thermal conductivity tensor,
in terms of the electromagnetic Green's function and potential, for any given
system. While typically negligible for optically dense bulk media, the
electromagnetic component of conductivity can be significant for optically
dilute media, and shows regimes of Fourier transport as well as unhindered
transport. Moreover, the electromagnetic contribution is relevant even for
dense media, when in presence of interfaces, as exemplified for the in-plane
conductivity of a nanosheet, which shows a variety of phenomena, including
absence of a Fourier regime.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Geometricities of driven transport in presence of reservoir squeezing
Authors: Javed Akhtar, Jimli Goswami, Himangshu Prabal Goswami
Date: 2023-09-26T07:33:37Z
Abstract:   In a bare site coupled to two reservoirs, we explore the statistics of boson
exchange in the presence of two simultaneous processes: squeezing the two
reservoirs and driving the two reservoirs. The squeezing parameters compete
with the geometric phaselike effect or geometricity to alter the nature of the
steadystate flux and noise. The even (odd) geometric cumulants and the total
minimum entropy are found to be symmetric (antisymmetric) with respect to
exchanging the left and right squeezing parameters. Upon increasing the
strength of the squeezing parameters, loss of geometricity is observed. Under
maximum squeezing, one can recover a standard steadystate fluctuation theorem
even in the presence of phase different driving protocol. A recently proposed
modified geometric thermodynamic uncertainty principle is found to be robust.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Complete security analysis of {quantum key distribution} based on
  unified model of sequential discrimination strategy
Authors: Min Namkung, Younghun Kwon
Date: 2023-09-26T07:23:34Z
Abstract:   The quantum key distribution for multiparty is one of the essential subjects
of study. Especially, without using entangled states, performing the quantum
key distribution for multiparty is a critical area of research. For this
purpose, sequential discrimination, which provides multiparty quantum
communication and quantum key distribution for {multiple receivers}, has
recently been introduced. However, since there is a possibility of
eavesdropping on the measurement result of a receiver by an intruder using
quantum entanglement, a security analysis for {quantum key distribution} should
be performed. {However,} no one has provided the security analysis for {quantum
key distribution in view of the sequential scheme} yet. In this work, by
proposing a unified model of sequential discrimination including an
eavesdropper, we provide the security analysis of {quantum key distribution
based on the unified model of sequential discrimination strategy.} In this
model, the success probability of eavesdropping and the secret key rate can be
used as a figure of merit. Then, we obtain a non-zero secret key rate between
the sender and receiver, which implies that the sender and receiver can share a
secret key despite eavesdropping. Further, we propose a realistic quantum
optical experiment for the proposed model. We observe that the secret key
between the sender and receiver can be non-zero, even with imperfections. As
opposed to common belief, we further observe that the success probability of
eavesdropping is smaller in the case of colored noise than in the case of white
noise.


Category: quant-ph
Title: In-situ characterization of qubit drive-phase distortions
Authors: M. F. Gely, J. M. Litarowicz, A. D. Leu, D. M. Lucas
Date: 2023-09-26T06:45:38Z
Abstract:   Reducing errors in quantum gates is critical to the development of quantum
computers. To do so, any distortions in the control signals should be
identified, however, conventional tools are not always applicable when part of
the system is under high vacuum, cryogenic, or microscopic. Here, we
demonstrate a method to detect and compensate for amplitude-dependent phase
changes, using the qubit itself as a probe. The technique is implemented using
a microwave-driven trapped ion qubit, where correcting phase distortions leads
to a three-fold improvement in single-qubit gate error, to attain
state-of-the-art performance benchmarked at $1.6(4)\times 10^{-6}$ error per
Clifford gate.


Category: hep-th
Title: Tidal Forces in Kerr-AdS and Grey Galaxies
Authors: Anand Balivada, Pius Ranjan Padhi, Amitabh Virmani
Date: 2023-09-26T04:59:05Z
Abstract:   In a recent paper [arXiv:2305.08922], it has been proposed that the endpoint
of the Kerr-AdS superradiant instability is a Grey Galaxy. The conjectured
solutions are supposed to be made up of a black hole with critical angular
velocity in the centre of AdS, surrounded by a large flat disk of thermal bulk
gas that revolves around the black hole. In the analysis of the proposed
solutions so far, gravitational effects due to the black hole on the thermal
gas have been neglected. A way to estimate these effects is via computing tidal
forces. With this motivation, we study tidal forces on objects moving in the
Kerr-AdS spacetime. To do so, we construct a parallel-transported orthonormal
frame along an arbitrary timelike or null geodesic. We then specialise to the
class of fast rotating geodesics lying in the equatorial plane, and estimate
tidal forces on the gas in the Grey Galaxies, modelling it as a collection of
particles moving on timelike geodesics. We show that the tidal forces are small
(and remain small even in the large mass limit), thereby providing additional
support to the idea that the gas is weakly interacting with the black hole.


Category: hep-th
Title: Open/closed Correspondence and Extended LG/CY Correspondence for Quintic
  Threefolds
Authors: Konstantin Aleshkin, Chiu-Chu Melissa Liu
Date: 2023-09-26T02:48:05Z
Abstract:   We show that Walcher's disk potential for the quintic threefold can be
represented as a central charge of a specific Gauged Linear Sigma Model which
we call the extended quintic GLSM. This representation provides an open/closed
correspondence for the quintic threefold since the central charge is a
generating function of closed genus-zero GLSM invariants. We also explain how
open Landau-Ginzburg/Calabi-Yau correspondence and open mirror symmetry for the
quintic are compatible with wall-crossing and mirror symmetry of the extended
GLSM, respectively.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A First Principles Derivation of Energy Conserving Momentum Jumps in
  Surface Hopping Simulations
Authors: Dorothy Miaoyu Huang, Austin T. Green, Craig C. Martens
Date: 2023-09-26T02:41:11Z
Abstract:   The fewest switches surface hopping (FSSH) method proposed by Tully in 1990
[J. C Tully, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 1061 (1990)] -- along with its many later
variations -- is basis for most practical simulations of molecular dynamics
with electronic transitions in realistic systems. Despite its popularity, a
rigorous formal derivation of the algorithm has yet to be achieved. In this
paper, we derive the energy conserving momentum jumps characterizing FSSH from
the perspective of quantum trajectory surface hopping (QTSH [C. C. Martens, J.
Phys. Chem. A 123, 1110 (2019)]. In the limit of localized nonadiabatic
transitions, simple mathematical and physical arguments allow the FSSH
algorithm to be derived from first principles. For general processes, the
quantum forces characterizing the QTSH method provides accurate results for
nonadiabatic dynamics with rigorous energy conservation at the ensemble level
within the consistency of the underlying stochastic surface hopping without
resorting to the artificial momentum rescaling of FSSH.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gauge-Invariant Scalar-Induced Gravitational Waves from Physical
  Observables
Authors: Vincent Comeau
Date: 2023-09-26T02:26:10Z
Abstract:   This paper discusses the gauge issue touching the gravitational waves induced
at the second order by the scalar modes of cosmological perturbations. These
waves are known to depend on the gauge used for their calculation. In this
paper, we propose a simple method of obtaining physically meaningful
expressions for such scalar-induced gravitational waves at the leading order.
The method is centred on well-defined observables, such as the magnetic part of
the Weyl tensor, or the Cotton tensor of a slicing of spacetime, which vanish
in the background and do not depend linearly on the scalar perturbations.
Generalizing the Stewart-Walker lemma, it is shown that the gravitational waves
contributing to such observables at the second order are automatically
gauge-invariant, even when the observable itself does not vanish at the first
order. In each case, the scalar-induced gravitational waves are related to the
ones computed in the Newtonian gauge, first for a general background, and then
for the particular case of a spacetime dominated by either radiation or cold
matter.


Category: hep-th
Title: Static black hole in minimal Horndeski gravity with Maxwell and
  Yang-Mills fields and some aspects of its thermodynamics
Authors: M. M. Stetsko
Date: 2023-09-26T02:19:51Z
Abstract:   In this work we obtain a static spherically symmetric charged black hole
solution in the framework of minimal Horndeski gravity with additional Maxwell
and Yang-Mills fields. The obtained solution is examined, in particular its
asymptotics are studied. Thermodynamics of the black hole is investigated,
namely we use an effective surface gravity to derive black hole temperature. To
obtain the first law of black hole thermodynamics the Wald method is applied.
We also use the extended thermodynamics approach, namely it allows us to derive
the Smarr relation, Gibbs free energy and the thermal equation of state. The
study of thermal values in the extended space shows rich phase behaviour, in
particular domain where the first order phase transition takes place and the
critical point with the second order phase transition. We also study thermal
behaviour near the critical point, obtain critical exponents and analyse the
Ehrenfest's equations at the critical point. Finally, we calculate the
Prigogine-Defay ratio confirming the conclusion about the second order phase
transition at the critical point.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Coexistence of multiuser entanglement distribution and classical light
  in optical fiber network with a semiconductor chip
Authors: Xu Jing, Cheng Qian, Hu Nian, Chenquan Wang, Jie Tang, Xiaowen Gu, Yuechan Kong, Tangsheng Chen, Yichen Liu, Chong Sheng, Dong Jiang, Bin Niu, Liangliang Lu
Date: 2023-09-26T01:13:54Z
Abstract:   Building communication links among multiple users in a scalable and robust
way is a key objective in achieving large-scale quantum networks. In realistic
scenario, noise from the coexisting classical light is inevitable and can
ultimately disrupt the entanglement. The previous significant fully connected
multiuser entanglement distribution experiments are conducted using dark fiber
links and there is no explicit relation between the entanglement degradations
induced by classical noise and its error rate. Here we fabricate a
semiconductor chip with a high figure-of-merit modal overlap to directly
generate broadband polarization entanglement. Our monolithic source maintains
polarization entanglement fidelity above 96% for 42 nm bandwidth with a
brightness of 1.2*10^7 Hz/mW. We perform a continuously working quantum
entanglement distribution among three users coexisting with classical light.
Under finite-key analysis, we establish secure keys and enable images
encryption as well as quantum secret sharing between users. Our work paves the
way for practical multiparty quantum communication with integrated photonic
architecture compatible with real-world fiber optical communication network.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Monolithic Integration of Single Quantum Emitters in hBN Bullseye
  Cavities
Authors: Lesley Spencer, Jake Horder, Sejeong Kim, Milos Toth, Igor Aharonovich
Date: 2023-09-25T23:19:50Z
Abstract:   The ability of hexagonal boron nitride to host quantum emitters in the form
of deep-level color centers makes it an important material for quantum photonic
applications. This work utilizes a monolithic circular Bragg grating device to
enhance the collection of single photons with 436 nm wavelength emitted from
quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride. We observe a 6- fold increase in
collected intensity for a single photon emitter coupled to a device compared to
an uncoupled emitter, and show exceptional spectral stability at cryogenic
temperature. The devices were fabricated using a number of etching methods,
beyond standard fluorine-based reactive ion etching, and the quantum emitters
were created using a site-specific electron beam irradiation technique. Our
work demonstrates the potential of monolithically-integrated systems for
deterministically-placed quantum emitters using a variety of fabrication
options.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Design of deeply cooled ultra-low dissipation amplifier and measuring
  cell for quantum measurements with a microwave single-photon counter
Authors: O. G. Turutanov, A. M. Korolev, V. I. Shnyrkov, A. P. Shapovalov, M. Baránek, S. Kern, V. Yu. Lyakhno, P. Neilinger, M. Grajcar
Date: 2023-09-25T22:04:55Z
Abstract:   The requirements and details of designing a measuring cell and
low-back-action deeply-cooled amplifier for quantum measurements at 10 mK are
discussed. This equipment is a part of a microwave single-photon counter based
on a superconducting flux qubit. The high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs)
in the amplifier operate in unsaturated microcurrent regime and dissipate only
1 microwatt of dc power per transistor. Simulated amplifier gain is 15 dB at
450 MHz with a high-impedance (~5 kOhm signal source and standard 50-Ohm
output.


Category: hep-th
Title: T-duality/plurality of BTZ black hole metric coupled to two fermionic
  fields
Authors: Ali Eghbali, Meysam Hosseinpour-Sadid, Adel Rezaei-Aghdam
Date: 2023-09-25T21:37:45Z
Abstract:   We ask the question of classical super (non-)Abelian T-duality for BTZ black
hole metric coupling to two fermionic fields. Our approach is based on super
Poisson-Lie (PL) T-duality in the presence of spectator fields. In order to
study the Abelian T-duality of the metric we dualize over the Abelian Lie
supergroups of the types $(1|2)$ and $(2|2)$, in such a way that it is shown
that both original and dual backgrounds of the models are conformally invariant
up to one-loop order in the presence of field strength. Then, we study the
non-Abelian T-duality of the BTZ vacuum metric coupling to two fermionic
fields. The dualizing is performed on some non-Abelian Lie supergroups of the
type $(2|2)$, in such a way that we are dealing with semi-Abelian superdoubles
which are non-isomorphic as Lie superalgebras in each of the models. In the
non-Abelian T-duality case, it is interesting to mention that the models can be
conformally invariant up to one-loop order in both cases of the absence and
presence of field strength. In addition, starting from the decomposition of
semi-Abelian Drinfeld superdoubles generated by some of the ${\C}^3 \oplus
{\A}_{1,1}$ Lie superbialgebras we study the super PL T-plurality of the BTZ
vacuum metric coupled to two fermionic fields. However, our findings are
interesting in themselves, but at a constructive level, can prompt many new
insights into supergravity and manifestly have interesting mathematical
relationships with double field theory.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A relativistic quantum broadcast channel
Authors: Ian Bernardes Barcellos, André G. S. Landulfo
Date: 2023-09-25T21:20:08Z
Abstract:   We investigate the transmission of classical and quantum information between
three observers in a general globally hyperbolic spacetime using a quantum
scalar field as a communication channel. We build a model for a quantum
broadcast channel in which one observer (sender) wishes to transmit (classical
and quantum) information to two other observers (receivers). They possess some
localized two-level quantum system (a qubit) that can interact with the quantum
field in order to prepare an input or receive the output of this channel. The
field is supposed to be in an arbitrary quasifree state, the three observers
may be in arbitrary states of motion, and no choice of representation of the
field canonical commutation relations is made. The interaction of the field and
qubits is such that it allows us to obtain the map that describes this channel
in a non-perturbative manner. We conclude by analyzing the rates at which
information can be transmitted through this channel and by investigating
relativistic causality effects on such rates.


Category: hep-th
Title: A relativistic quantum broadcast channel
Authors: Ian Bernardes Barcellos, André G. S. Landulfo
Date: 2023-09-25T21:20:08Z
Abstract:   We investigate the transmission of classical and quantum information between
three observers in a general globally hyperbolic spacetime using a quantum
scalar field as a communication channel. We build a model for a quantum
broadcast channel in which one observer (sender) wishes to transmit (classical
and quantum) information to two other observers (receivers). They possess some
localized two-level quantum system (a qubit) that can interact with the quantum
field in order to prepare an input or receive the output of this channel. The
field is supposed to be in an arbitrary quasifree state, the three observers
may be in arbitrary states of motion, and no choice of representation of the
field canonical commutation relations is made. The interaction of the field and
qubits is such that it allows us to obtain the map that describes this channel
in a non-perturbative manner. We conclude by analyzing the rates at which
information can be transmitted through this channel and by investigating
relativistic causality effects on such rates.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Physical Meaning of Neumann and Robin Boundary Conditions for the
  Schrödinger Equation
Authors: Roderich Tumulka
Date: 2023-09-25T19:43:15Z
Abstract:   The non-relativistic Schr\"odinger equation on a domain $\Omega\subset
\mathbb{R}^n$ with boundary is often considered with homogeneous Dirichlet
boundary conditions ($\psi(x)=0$ for $x$ on the boundary) or homogeneous
Neumann boundary conditions ($\partial_n \psi(x)=0$ for $x$ on the boundary and
$\partial_n$ the normal derivative) or Robin boundary conditions
($\partial_n\psi(x)=\alpha\psi(x)$ for $x$ on the boundary and $\alpha$ a real
parameter). Physically, the Dirichlet condition applies if outside of $\Omega$
the potential is much higher than inside (``potential well''). We ask, when
does the Neumann or Robin condition apply physically? Our answer is, when the
potential is much lower (at the appropriate level) in a thin layer before a
potential well, or when a negative delta potential of the appropriate strength
is added close to the potential well.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Detecting the Force Range of Nucleons through Neutron Scattering with
  Hydrogen Atom
Authors: Mingzhao Xing, Libin Fu
Date: 2023-09-25T19:09:52Z
Abstract:   Neutron scattering plays a pivotal role in understanding the fundamental
properties of atomic nuclei and the forces that govern their interactions. In
this study, we present a novel theoretical approach to investigate the
scattering between the neutron and the hydrogen atom within the context of a
three-body system involving a neutron, a proton and an electron. By employing a
semi-classical methodology and solving the Time Dependent Schr\"odinger
Equation (TDSE), we explore the momentum spectrum of ionized electrons and
unveil the dynamics of the scattering process. Our approach considers the
impact of nuclear forces on the electron's state and position, shedding light
on the intricate interplay between the fundamental particles. The results offer
insights into the nature of neutron scattering processes and provide a deeper
understanding of nuclear interactions in a three-body scattering scenario.


Category: hep-th
Title: Longitudinal Galilean and Carrollian limits of non-relativistic strings
Authors: Leo Bidussi, Troels Harmark, Jelle Hartong, Niels A. Obers, Gerben Oling
Date: 2023-09-25T18:59:41Z
Abstract:   It is well known that one can take an infinite speed of light limit that
gives rise to non-relativistic strings with a relativistic worldsheet sigma
model but with a non-relativistic target space geometry. In this work we
systematically explore two further limits in which the worldsheet becomes
non-Lorentzian. The first gives rise to a Galilean string with a Galilean
structure on the worldsheet, extending previous work on Spin Matrix-related
string theory limits. The second is a completely novel limit leading to a
worldsheet theory with a Carrollian structure. We find the Nambu-Goto and
Polyakov formulations of both limits and explore gauge fixing choices.
Furthermore, we study in detail the case of the Galilean string for a class of
target space geometries that are related to Spin Matrix target space
geometries, for which the Nambu-Goto action (in static gauge) is quadratic in
the fields.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Non-radiant multiphoton states in quantum ring oligomers
Authors: Nikita Ustimenko, Danil Kornovan, Ilya Volkov, Alexandra Sheremet, Roman Savelev, Mihail Petrov
Date: 2023-09-25T18:51:31Z
Abstract:   Arrays of coupled dipole emitters support collective single- and multiphoton
states that can preserve quantum excitations. One of the crucial
characteristics of these states is the lifetime, which is fundamentally limited
due to spontaneous emission. Here, we present a mechanism of external coupling
of two states via a radiative continuum, which allows for an increase in the
lifetime of both single and double excitations. As an illustrative example, we
consider a ring-like ensemble of quantum emitters, demonstrating that upon
slight optimization of the structure geometry, one can increase the lifetime of
singly and doubly excited states with high orbital momentum by several orders
of magnitude.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Wave Matrix Lindbladization II: General Lindbladians, Linear
  Combinations, and Polynomials
Authors: Dhrumil Patel, Mark M. Wilde
Date: 2023-09-25T18:20:00Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we investigate the problem of simulating open system dynamics
governed by the well-known Lindblad master equation. In our prequel paper, we
introduced an input model in which Lindblad operators are encoded into pure
quantum states, called program states, and we also introduced a method, called
wave matrix Lindbladization, for simulating Lindbladian evolution by means of
interacting the system of interest with these program states. Therein, we
focused on a simple case in which the Lindbladian consists of only one Lindblad
operator and a Hamiltonian. Here, we extend the method to simulating general
Lindbladians and other cases in which a Lindblad operator is expressed as a
linear combination or a polynomial of the operators encoded into the program
states. We propose quantum algorithms for all these cases and also investigate
their sample complexity, i.e., the number of program states needed to simulate
a given Lindbladian evolution approximately. Finally, we demonstrate that our
quantum algorithms provide an efficient route for simulating Lindbladian
evolution relative to full tomography of encoded operators, by proving that the
sample complexity for tomography is dependent on the dimension of the system,
whereas the sample complexity of wave matrix Lindbladization is dimension
independent.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Exact Solution to the Quantum and Classical Dimer Models on the Spectre
  Aperiodic Monotiling
Authors: Shobhna Singh, Felix Flicker
Date: 2023-09-25T18:08:15Z
Abstract:   The decades-long search for a shape that tiles the plane only aperiodically
under translations and rotations recently ended with the discovery of the
`spectre' aperiodic monotile. In this setting we study the dimer model, in
which dimers are placed along tile edges such that each vertex meets precisely
one dimer. The complexity of the tiling combines with the dimer constraint to
allow an exact solution to the model. The partition function is
$\mathcal{Z}=2^{N_{\textrm{Mystic}}+1}$ where $N_{\textrm{Mystic}}$ is the
number of `Mystic' tiles. We exactly solve the quantum dimer (Rokhsar Kivelson)
model in the same setting by identifying an eigenbasis at all interaction
strengths $V/t$. We find that test monomers, once created, can be infinitely
separated at zero energy cost for all $V/t$, constituting a deconfined phase in
a 2+1D bipartite quantum dimer model.


Category: hep-th
Title: Hypermultiplet metric and NS5-instantons
Authors: Sergei Alexandrov, Khalil Bendriss
Date: 2023-09-25T18:01:50Z
Abstract:   The metric on the hypermultiplet moduli space of Calabi-Yau compactifications
of type II string theory is known to receive D-brane and NS5-brane instanton
corrections. We compute explicit expressions for these corrections in the
one-instanton approximation, but to all orders in the string coupling expansion
around the instantons. As a consistency check, we prove that in the case of one
(universal) hypermultiplet, the resulting metric fits the Przanowski
description of self-dual Einstein spaces. We also show that in the small string
coupling limit the metric acquires a certain square structure, consistently
with expectations from the string amplitudes analysis. This result provides
explicit predictions for yet mysterious string amplitudes in the presence of
NS5-branes.


Category: hep-th
Title: Higher-form symmetry and chiral transport in real-time lattice $U(1)$
  gauge theory
Authors: Arpit Das, Adrien Florio, Nabil Iqbal, Napat Poovuttikul
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:54Z
Abstract:   We study classical lattice simulations of theories of electrodynamics coupled
to charged matter at finite temperature, interpreting them using the
higher-form symmetry formulation of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). We compute
transport coefficients using classical Kubo formulas on the lattice and show
that the properties of the simulated plasma are in complete agreement with the
predictions from effective field theories. In particular, the higher-form
formulation allows us to understand from hydrodynamic considerations the
relaxation rate of axial charge in the chiral plasma observed in previous
simulations. A key point is that the resistivity of the plasma -- defined in
terms of Kubo formulas for the electric field in the 1-form formulation of MHD
-- remains a well-defined and predictive quantity at strong electromagnetic
coupling. However, the Kubo formulas used to define the conventional
conductivity vanish at low frequencies due to electrodynamic fluctuations, and
thus the concept of the conductivity of a gauged electric current must be
interpreted with care.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Universally Robust Quantum Control
Authors: Pablo M. Poggi, Gabriele De Chiara, Steve Campbell, Anthony Kiely
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:34Z
Abstract:   We study the robustness of the evolution of a quantum system against small
uncontrolled variations in parameters in the Hamiltonian. We show that the
fidelity susceptibility, which quantifies the perturbative error to leading
order, can be expressed in superoperator form and use this to derive control
pulses which are robust to any class of systematic unknown errors. The proposed
optimal control protocol is equivalent to searching for a sequence of unitaries
that mimics the first-order moments of the Haar distribution, i.e. it
constitutes a 1-design. We highlight the power of our results for error
resistant single- and two-qubit gates.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A Bloch-based quantum optical analysis of high-harmonic generation in
  semiconductors
Authors: Javier Rivera-Dean, Philipp Stammer, Andrew S. Maxwell, Theocharis Lamprou, Andrés F. Ordóñez, Emilio Pisanty, Paraskevas Tzallas, Maciej Lewenstein, Marcelo F. Ciappina
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:22Z
Abstract:   High-harmonic generation has emerged as a pivotal process in strong-field
physics, yielding extreme ultraviolet radiation and attosecond pulses with a
wide range of applications. Furthermore, its emergent connection with the field
of quantum optics has revealed its potential for generating non-classical
states of light. Here, we investigate the process of high-harmonic generation
in semiconductors under a quantum optical perspective while using a Bloch-based
solid-state description. Through the implementation of quantum operations based
on the measurement of high-order harmonics, we demonstrate the generation of
non-classical light states similar to those found when driving atomic systems.
These states are characterized using diverse quantum optical observables and
quantum information measures, showing the influence of electron dynamics on
their properties. Additionally, we analyze the dependence of their features on
solid characteristics such as the dephasing time and crystal orientation, while
also assessing their sensitivity to changes in driving field strength. This
study provides insights into HHG in semiconductors and its potential for
generating non-classical light sources.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Memory: A Missing Piece in Quantum Computing Units
Authors: Chenxu Liu, Meng Wang, Samuel A. Stein, Yufei Ding, Ang Li
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:08Z
Abstract:   Memory is an indispensable component in classical computing systems. While
the development of quantum computing is still in its early stages, current
quantum processing units mainly function as quantum registers. Consequently,
the actual role of quantum memory in future advanced quantum computing
architectures remains unclear. With the rapid scaling of qubits, it is
opportune to explore the potential and feasibility of quantum memory across
different substrate device technologies and application scenarios. In this
paper, we provide a full design stack view of quantum memory. We start from the
elementary component of a quantum memory device, quantum memory cells. We
provide an abstraction to a quantum memory cell and define metrics to measure
the performance of physical platforms. Combined with addressing functionality,
we then review two types of quantum memory devices: random access quantum
memory (RAQM) and quantum random access memory (QRAM). Building on top of these
devices, quantum memory units in the computing architecture, including building
a quantum memory unit, quantum cache, quantum buffer, and using QRAM for the
quantum input-output module, are discussed. We further propose the programming
model for the quantum memory units and discuss their possible applications. By
presenting this work, we aim to attract more researchers from both the Quantum
Information Science (QIS) and classical memory communities to enter this
emerging and exciting area.


Category: quant-ph
Title: The Bethe Ansatz as a Quantum Circuit
Authors: Roberto Ruiz, Alejandro Sopena, Max Hunter Gordon, Germán Sierra, Esperanza López
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:06Z
Abstract:   The Bethe ansatz represents an analytical method enabling the exact solution
of numerous models in condensed matter physics and statistical mechanics. When
a global symmetry is present, the trial wavefunctions of the Bethe ansatz
consist of plane wave superpositions. Previously, it has been shown that the
Bethe ansatz can be recast as a deterministic quantum circuit. An analytical
derivation of the quantum gates that form the circuit was lacking however. Here
we present a comprehensive study of the transformation that brings the Bethe
ansatz into a quantum circuit, which leads us to determine the analytical
expression of the circuit gates. As a crucial step of the derivation, we
present a simple set of diagrammatic rules that define a novel Matrix Product
State network building Bethe wavefunctions. Remarkably, this provides a new
perspective on the equivalence between the coordinate and algebraic versions of
the Bethe ansatz.


Category: hep-th
Title: The Bethe Ansatz as a Quantum Circuit
Authors: Roberto Ruiz, Alejandro Sopena, Max Hunter Gordon, Germán Sierra, Esperanza López
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:06Z
Abstract:   The Bethe ansatz represents an analytical method enabling the exact solution
of numerous models in condensed matter physics and statistical mechanics. When
a global symmetry is present, the trial wavefunctions of the Bethe ansatz
consist of plane wave superpositions. Previously, it has been shown that the
Bethe ansatz can be recast as a deterministic quantum circuit. An analytical
derivation of the quantum gates that form the circuit was lacking however. Here
we present a comprehensive study of the transformation that brings the Bethe
ansatz into a quantum circuit, which leads us to determine the analytical
expression of the circuit gates. As a crucial step of the derivation, we
present a simple set of diagrammatic rules that define a novel Matrix Product
State network building Bethe wavefunctions. Remarkably, this provides a new
perspective on the equivalence between the coordinate and algebraic versions of
the Bethe ansatz.


Category: hep-th
Title: Flux Correlators and Semiclassics
Authors: Eren Firat, Alexander Monin, Riccardo Rattazzi, Matthew T. Walters
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:04Z
Abstract:   We consider correlators for the flux of energy and charge in the background
of operators with large global $U(1)$ charge in conformal field theory (CFT).
It has recently been shown that the corresponding Euclidean correlators
generically admit a semiclassical description in terms of the effective field
theory (EFT) for a conformal superfluid. We adapt the semiclassical description
to Lorentzian observables and compute the leading large charge behavior of the
flux correlators in general $U(1)$ symmetric CFTs. We discuss the regime of
validity of the large charge EFT for these Lorentzian observables and the
subtleties in extending the EFT approach to subleading corrections. We also
consider the Wilson-Fisher fixed point in $d=4-\epsilon$ dimensions, which
offers a specific weakly coupled realization of the general setup, where the
subleading corrections can be systematically computed without relying on an
EFT.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Finite Pulse-Time Effects in Long-Baseline Quantum Clock Interferometry
Authors: Gregor Janson, Alexander Friedrich, Richard Lopp
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:03Z
Abstract:   Quantum-clock interferometry has been suggested as a quantum probe to test
the universality of free fall (UFF) and the universality of gravitational
redshift (UGR). In typical experimental schemes it seems advantageous to employ
Doppler-free E1-M1 transitions which have so far been investigated in quantum
gases at rest. Here, we consider the fully quantized atomic degrees of freedom
and study the interplay of the quantum center-of-mass (COM) $-$ that can become
delocalized $-$ together with the internal clock transitions. In particular, we
derive a model for finite-time E1-M1 transitions with atomic intern-extern
coupling and arbitrary position-dependent laser intensities. We further provide
generalizations to the ideal expressions for perturbed recoilless clock pulses.
Finally, we show at the example of a Gaussian laser beam that the proposed
quantum-clock interferometers are stable against perturbations from varying
optical fields for a sufficiently small quantum delocalization of the atomic
COM.


Category: hep-th
Title: Cartanification of contragredient Lie superalgebras
Authors: Martin Cederwall, Jakob Palmkvist
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:02Z
Abstract:   Let $B$ be a $\mathbb{Z}$-graded Lie superalgebra equipped with an invariant
$\mathbb{Z}_2$-symmetric homogeneous bilinear form and containing a grading
element. Its local part (in the terminology of Kac) $B_{-1} \oplus B_{0} \oplus
B_{1}$ gives rise to another $\mathbb{Z}$-graded Lie superalgebra, recently
constructed in arXiv:2207.12417, that we here denote $B^W$ and call the
cartanification of $B^W$, since it is of Cartan type in the cases where it
happens to finite-dimensional. In cases where $B$ is given by a generalised
Cartan matrix, we compare $B^W$ to the tensor hierarchy algebra $W$ constructed
from the same generalised Cartan matrix by a modification of the generators and
relations. We generalise this construction and give conditions under which $W$
and $B^W$ are isomorphic, proving a conjecture in arXiv:2207.12417. We expect
that the algebras with restricted associativity underlying the cartanifications
will be useful in applications of tensor hierarchy algebras to the field of
extended geometry in physics.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Homotopy, Symmetry, and Non-Hermitian Band Topology
Authors: Kang Yang, Zhi Li, J. Lukas K. König, Lukas Rødland, Marcus Stålhammar, Emil J. Bergholtz
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   Non-Hermitian matrices are ubiquitous in the description of nature ranging
from classical dissipative systems, including optical, electrical, and
mechanical metamaterials, to scattering of waves and open quantum many-body
systems. Seminal K-theory classifications of non-Hermitian systems based on
line and point gaps in the presence of symmetry have deepened the understanding
of a wide range of physical phenomena. However, ample systems remain beyond
this description; reference points and lines are in general unable to
distinguish whether multiple non-Hermitian bands exhibit band crossings and
braids. To remedy this we consider the complementary notions of non-Hermitian
band gaps and separation gaps that crucially include a broad class of
multi-band scenarios, enabling the description of generic band structures with
symmetries. With these concepts, we provide a unified and systematic
classification of both gapped and nodal non-Hermitian systems in the presence
of physically relevant parity-time ($\mathcal{PT}$) and pseudo-Hermitian
symmetries using homotopy theory. This uncovers new fragile phases and,
remarkably, also implies new stable phenomena stemming from the topology of
both eigenvalues and eigenvectors. In particular, we reveal different Abelian
and non-Abelian phases in $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetric systems, described by frame
and braid topology. The corresponding invariants are robust to
symmetry-preserving perturbations that do not close band gaps, and they also
predict the deformation rules of nodal phases. We further demonstrate that
spontaneous symmetry breaking in $\mathcal{PT}$-symmetric systems is captured
by a Chern-Euler description. These results open the door for theoretical and
experimental exploration of a rich variety of novel topological phenomena in a
wide range of physical platforms.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Towards a physically motivated notion of Gaussian complexity geometry
Authors: Bruno de S. L. Torres, Eduardo Martín-Martínez
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We present a general construction of a geometric notion of circuit complexity
for Gaussian states (both bosonic and fermionic) in terms of Riemannian
geometry. We lay out general conditions that a Riemannian metric function on
the space of Gaussian states should satisfy in order for it to yield a
physically reasonable measure of complexity. This general formalism can
naturally accommodate modifications to complexity geometries that arise from
cost functions that depend nontrivially on the instantaneous state and on the
direction on circuit space at each point. We explore these modifications and,
as a particular case, we show how to account for time-reversal symmetry
breaking in measures of complexity, which is often natural from an experimental
(and thermodynamical) perspective, but is absent in commonly studied complexity
measures. This establishes a first step towards building a quantitative,
geometric notion of complexity that faithfully mimics what is experienced as
"easy" or "hard" to implement in a lab from a physically motivated point of
view.


Category: quant-ph
Title: On the expressivity of embedding quantum kernels
Authors: Elies Gil-Fuster, Jens Eisert, Vedran Dunjko
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   One of the most natural connections between quantum and classical machine
learning has been established in the context of kernel methods. Kernel methods
rely on kernels, which are inner products of feature vectors living in large
feature spaces. Quantum kernels are typically evaluated by explicitly
constructing quantum feature states and then taking their inner product, here
called embedding quantum kernels. Since classical kernels are usually evaluated
without using the feature vectors explicitly, we wonder how expressive
embedding quantum kernels are. In this work, we raise the fundamental question:
can all quantum kernels be expressed as the inner product of quantum feature
states? Our first result is positive: Invoking computational universality, we
find that for any kernel function there always exists a corresponding quantum
feature map and an embedding quantum kernel. The more operational reading of
the question is concerned with efficient constructions, however. In a second
part, we formalize the question of universality of efficient embedding quantum
kernels. For shift-invariant kernels, we use the technique of random Fourier
features to show that they are universal within the broad class of all kernels
which allow a variant of efficient Fourier sampling. We then extend this result
to a new class of so-called composition kernels, which we show also contains
projected quantum kernels introduced in recent works. After proving the
universality of embedding quantum kernels for both shift-invariant and
composition kernels, we identify the directions towards new, more exotic, and
unexplored quantum kernel families, for which it still remains open whether
they correspond to efficient embedding quantum kernels.


Category: hep-th
Title: Dualities and Discretizations of Integrable Quantum Field Theories from
  4d Chern-Simons Theory
Authors: Meer Ashwinkumar, Jun-ichi Sakamoto, Masahito Yamazaki
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We elucidate the relationship between 2d integrable field theories and 2d
integrable lattice models, in the framework of the 4d Chern-Simons theory. The
2d integrable field theory is realized by coupling the 4d theory to multiple 2d
surface order defects, each of which is then discretized into 1d defects. We
find that the resulting defects can be dualized into Wilson lines, so that the
lattice of discretized defects realizes integrable lattice models. Our
discretization procedure works systematically for a broad class of integrable
models (including trigonometric and elliptic models), and uncovers a rich web
of new dualities among integrable field theories. We also study the
anomaly-inflow mechanism for the integrable models, which is required for the
quantum integrability of field theories. By analyzing the anomalies of chiral
defects, we derive a new set of bosonization dualities between generalizations
of massless Thirring models and coupled Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) models. We
study an embedding of our setup into string theory, where the thermodynamic
limit of the lattice models is realized by polarizations of D-branes.


Category: hep-th
Title: Simplicity of AdS Super Yang-Mills at One Loop
Authors: Zhongjie Huang, Bo Wang, Ellis Ye Yuan, Xinan Zhou
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We perform a systematic bootstrap analysis of four-point one-loop Mellin
amplitudes for super gluons in $\mathrm{AdS}_5\times\mathrm{S}^3$ with
arbitrary Kaluza-Klein weights. The analysis produces the general expressions
for these amplitudes at extremalities two and three, as well as analytic
results for many other special cases. From these results we observe remarkable
simplicity. We find that the Mellin amplitudes always contain only simultaneous
poles in two Mellin-Mandelstam variables, extending a previous observation in
the simplest case with the lowest Kaluza-Klein weights. Moreover, we discover a
substantial extension of the implication of the eight-dimensional hidden
conformal symmetry, which goes far beyond the Mellin poles associated with the
leading logarithmic singularities. This leaves only a small finite set of poles
which can be determined on a case-by-case basis from the contributions of
protected operators in the OPE.


Category: hep-th
Title: Towards a physically motivated notion of Gaussian complexity geometry
Authors: Bruno de S. L. Torres, Eduardo Martín-Martínez
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   We present a general construction of a geometric notion of circuit complexity
for Gaussian states (both bosonic and fermionic) in terms of Riemannian
geometry. We lay out general conditions that a Riemannian metric function on
the space of Gaussian states should satisfy in order for it to yield a
physically reasonable measure of complexity. This general formalism can
naturally accommodate modifications to complexity geometries that arise from
cost functions that depend nontrivially on the instantaneous state and on the
direction on circuit space at each point. We explore these modifications and,
as a particular case, we show how to account for time-reversal symmetry
breaking in measures of complexity, which is often natural from an experimental
(and thermodynamical) perspective, but is absent in commonly studied complexity
measures. This establishes a first step towards building a quantitative,
geometric notion of complexity that faithfully mimics what is experienced as
"easy" or "hard" to implement in a lab from a physically motivated point of
view.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Provable advantages of kernel-based quantum learners and quantum
  preprocessing based on Grover's algorithm
Authors: Till Muser, Elias Zapusek, Vasilis Belis, Florentin Reiter
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   There is an ongoing effort to find quantum speedups for learning problems.
Recently, [Y. Liu et al., Nat. Phys. $\textbf{17}$, 1013--1017 (2021)] have
proven an exponential speedup for quantum support vector machines by leveraging
the speedup of Shor's algorithm. We expand upon this result and identify a
speedup utilizing Grover's algorithm in the kernel of a support vector machine.
To show the practicality of the kernel structure we apply it to a problem
related to pattern matching, providing a practical yet provable advantage.
Moreover, we show that combining quantum computation in a preprocessing step
with classical methods for classification further improves classifier
performance.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Signatures of Parafermion Zero Modes in Fractional Quantum
  Hall-Superconductor Heterostructures
Authors: Junyi Cao, Angela Kou, Eduardo Fradkin
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   Parafermion zero modes can arise in hybrid structures composed of $\nu=1/m$
fractional quantum Hall edges proximitized with an s-wave superconductor. Here
we consider parafermion and Cooper pair tunneling, and backscattering in a
junction formed in such hybrid structures. We find that the $4\pi m$
periodicity due to parafermion-only tunneling reduces, in the presence of
backscattering, to $4\pi$-periodic at zero temperature and $2\pi$-periodic at
finite temperature unless the fermion parity is fixed. Nevertheless, a clear
signature of parafermion tunneling remains in the shape of the current-phase
relation.


Category: hep-th
Title: Averaged Null Energy and the Renormalization Group
Authors: Thomas Hartman, Grégoire Mathys
Date: 2023-09-25T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   We establish a connection between the averaged null energy condition (ANEC)
and the monotonicity of the renormalization group, by studying the light-ray
operator $\int du T_{uu}$ in quantum field theories that flow between two
conformal fixed points. In four dimensions, we derive an exact sum rule
relating this operator to the Euler coefficient in the trace anomaly, and show
that the ANEC implies the a-theorem. The argument is based on matching
anomalies in the stress tensor 3-point function, and relies on special
properties of contact terms involving light-ray operators. We also illustrate
the sum rule for the example of a free massive scalar field. Averaged null
energy appears in a variety of other applications to quantum field theory,
including causality constraints, Lorentzian inversion, and quantum information.
The quantum information perspective provides a new derivation of the
$a$-theorem from the monotonicity of relative entropy. The equation relating
our sum rule to the dilaton scattering amplitude in the forward limit suggests
an inversion formula for non-conformal theories.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum-Enhanced Parameter Estimation Without Entanglement
Authors: Pragati Gupta
Date: 2023-09-25T17:57:45Z
Abstract:   Entanglement is generally considered necessary for achieving the Heisenberg
limit in quantum metrology. We construct analogues of Dicke and GHZ states on a
single $N+1$ dimensional qudit that achieve precision equivalent to
symmetrically entangled states on $N$ qubits, showing that entanglement is not
necessary for going beyond the standard quantum limit. We define a measure of
non-classicality based on quantum Fisher information and estimate the
achievable precision, suggesting a close relationship between non-classical
states and metrological power of qudits. Our work offers an exponential
reduction in the physical resources required for quantum-enhanced parameter
estimation, making it accessible on any quantum system with a high-dimensional
Hilbert space.


Category: hep-th
Title: Hall conductivity pump
Authors: Lev Spodyneiko
Date: 2023-09-25T17:57:11Z
Abstract:   The Thouless charge pump represents a transfer of electric charge through a
gapped one-dimensional system between its zero-dimensional boundaries under a
periodic change of a parameter. The value of the passed charged during a single
cycle is known to be a topological invariant. We construct an analogous
topological invariant that measures a pump of Hall conductance inside of
three-dimensional material between its two-dimensional boundaries.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Futility and utility of a few ancillas for Pauli channel learning
Authors: Sitan Chen, Weiyuan Gong
Date: 2023-09-25T17:53:12Z
Abstract:   In this paper we revisit one of the prototypical tasks for characterizing the
structure of noise in quantum devices, estimating the eigenvalues of an
$n$-qubit Pauli noise channel. Prior work (Chen et al., 2022) established
exponential lower bounds for this task for algorithms with limited quantum
memory. We first improve upon their lower bounds and show:
  (1) Any algorithm without quantum memory must make $\Omega(2^n/\epsilon^2)$
measurements to estimate each eigenvalue within error $\epsilon$. This is tight
and implies the randomized benchmarking protocol is optimal, resolving an open
question of (Flammia and Wallman, 2020).
  (2) Any algorithm with $\le k$ ancilla qubits of quantum memory must make
$\Omega(2^{(n-k)/3})$ queries to the unknown channel. Crucially, unlike in
(Chen et al., 2022), our bound holds even if arbitrary adaptive control and
channel concatenation are allowed.
  In fact these lower bounds, like those of (Chen et al., 2022), hold even for
the easier hypothesis testing problem of determining whether the underlying
channel is completely depolarizing or has exactly one other nontrivial
eigenvalue. Surprisingly, we show that:
  (3) With only $k=2$ ancilla qubits of quantum memory, there is an algorithm
that solves this hypothesis testing task with high probability using a single
measurement.
  Note that (3) does not contradict (2) as the protocol concatenates
exponentially many queries to the channel before the measurement. This result
suggests a novel mechanism by which channel concatenation and $O(1)$ qubits of
quantum memory could work in tandem to yield striking speedups for quantum
process learning that are not possible for quantum state learning.


Category: hep-th
Title: Distorted static photon surfaces in perturbed Reissner-Nordström
  spacetimes
Authors: Hirotaka Yoshino
Date: 2023-09-25T17:43:19Z
Abstract:   The photon surface is defined as a timelike surface $S$ such that any photon
emitted in arbitrary tangential direction to $S$ from an arbitrary point on $S$
continues to propagate on $S$. In this paper, we examine whether a static
photon surface can be present in distorted electrovacuum spacetimes with
perturbative approach, by constructing analytic solutions to the equations for
static perturbations of a Reissner-Nordstr\"om spacetime that are regular
outside the background photon surface. For each of the $\ell\ge 2$ modes, there
are two physical solutions to the perturbative equations that correspond to
adding the multipole moments of mass and electric charge, respectively. By
adjusting the ratio of the amplitudes of the two solutions appropriately, it is
possible to realize a distorted photon surface. In the case of $\ell=1$,
although there is only one physical solution to the perturbative equations,
there is also a degree of freedom to shift the coordinate position of the
photon surface, and this enables the formation of a photon surface. Such a
photon surface has a spherically symmetric spatial section, but it is also
distorted in the three-dimensional sense. Our results show that distorted
static photon surfaces can be formed at least at the level of the first-order
perturbations, and imply that the uniqueness of the photon surface may not hold
in electrovacuum spacetimes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Fast coherent control of nitrogen-14 spins associated with
  nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamonds using dynamical decoupling
Authors: Kosuke Mizuno, Ikuya Fujisaki, Hiroyoshi Tomioka, Hitoshi Ishiwata, Shinobu Onoda, Takayuki Iwasaki, Keigo Arai, Mutsuko Hatano
Date: 2023-09-25T16:42:07Z
Abstract:   A nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in a diamond enables the access to an electron
spin, which is expected to present highly sensitive quantum sensors. Although
exploiting a nitrogen nuclear spin improves the sensitivity, manipulating it
using a resonant pulse requires a long gate time owing to its small
gyromagnetic ratio. Another technique to control nuclear spins is a conditional
rotation gate based on dynamical decoupling, which is faster but unavailable
for nitrogen spins owing to the lack of transverse hyperfine coupling with the
electron spin. In this study, we generated effective transverse coupling by
applying a weak off-axis magnetic field. An effective coupling depends on the
off-axis field; the conditional rotation gate on the nitrogen-14 spins of an NV
center was demonstrated within 4.2 {\mu}s under an 1.8% off-axis field and a
longitudinal field of approximately 280 mT. We estimated that a population
transfer from the electron to nitrogen spins can be implemented with 8.7
{\mu}s. Our method is applicable to an ensemble of NV centers, in addition to a
single NV center.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gravitational production of matter and radiation during reheating
Authors: Simon Cléry
Date: 2023-09-25T16:23:07Z
Abstract:   I present the production of matter and radiation during reheating after
inflation, considering only gravitational interactions between the inflaton
background and the other sectors. Processes considered are the following: i)
the exchange of a graviton, $h_{\mu \nu}$, involved in the scattering of the
inflaton or particles in the newly created radiation bath; ii) scattering of
the inflaton background and particles in the radiation bath including the
effects of non-minimal couplings to curvature of the Higgs boson and the
inflaton. Requiring the existence of heavy right-handed neutrinos (RHN), I show
that a minimal scenario utilizing only these "gravitational portals" is able to
generate simultaneously the observed relic density of Dark Matter (DM), the
baryon asymmetry through leptogenesis, as well as a sufficiently hot thermal
bath after inflation, for generic models of large field inflation.


Category: hep-th
Title: Chiral Meissner effect in time-reversal invariant Weyl superconductors
Authors: Vira Shyta, Jeroen van den Brink, Flavio S. Nogueira
Date: 2023-09-25T16:20:27Z
Abstract:   Weyl semimetals are characterised by pairs of topologically protected nodes
at which electronic bands cross and electrons attain a definite chirality. Due
to the chiral anomaly, the non-conservation of charges with given chirality,
the axion term appears in their effective electromagnetic action. We determine
how this affects the properties of time-reversal invariant Weyl {\it
superconductors} (SCs) in the London regime. For type II SCs we show that axion
coupling generates magnetic $B$-fields transverse to a vortex. Above a critical
axion coupling the vortex become unstable and a transition into a type I SC
follows. In this regime an applied $B$-field not only decays inside the SC
within the London penetration depth, but the axion coupling generates an
additional perpendicular magnetic field. Consequently the field inside the
superconductor progressively rotates away from the applied one when going into
the bulk. At a critical coupling the Meissner state breaks down. The novel
chiral SC state that then emerges has a periodically divergent susceptibility,
at which the winding of $B$ inside the superconductor jumps. Thus the axion
coupling leaves crisp experimentally observable signatures in Weyl SCs.


Category: quant-ph
Title: QED calculations of the nuclear recoil effect in muonic atoms
Authors: Vladimir A. Yerokhin, Natalia S. Oreshkina
Date: 2023-09-25T15:14:56Z
Abstract:   The nuclear recoil effect, known also as the mass shift, is one of
theoretical contributions to the energy levels in muonic atoms. Accurate
theoretical predictions are therefore needed for extracting e.g. the nuclear
charge radii from experimental spectra. We report rigorous QED calculations of
the nuclear recoil correction in muonic atoms, carried out to all orders in the
nuclear binding strength parameter $Z\alpha$ (where $Z$ is the nuclear charge
number and $\alpha$ is the fine structure constant). The calculations show
differences with the previous approximate treatment of this effect, most
pronounced for the lowest-lying bound states. The calculated recoil correction
was found to be sensitive to the nuclear charge radius, which needs to be
accounted for when extracting nuclear parameters from the measured spectra.


Category: hep-th
Title: Orthosymplectic superoscillator Lax matrices
Authors: Rouven Frassek, Alexander Tsymbaliuk
Date: 2023-09-25T14:59:22Z
Abstract:   We construct Lax matrices of superoscillator type that are solutions of the
RTT-relation for the rational orthosymplectic $R$-matrix, generalizing
orthogonal and symplectic oscillator type Lax matrices previously constructed
by the authors in arXiv:2001.06825, arXiv:2104.14518 and arXiv:2112.12065. We
further establish factorisation formulas among the presented solutions.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Learning Restricted Boltzmann Machines with greedy quantum search
Authors: Liming Zhao, Aman Agrawal, Patrick Rebentrost
Date: 2023-09-25T14:56:30Z
Abstract:   Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are widely used probabilistic undirected
graphical models with visible and latent nodes, playing an important role in
statistics and machine learning. The task of structure learning for RBMs
involves inferring the underlying graph by using samples from the visible
nodes. Specifically, learning the two-hop neighbors of each visible node allows
for the inference of the graph structure. Prior research has addressed the
structure learning problem for specific classes of RBMs, namely ferromagnetic
and locally consistent RBMs. In this paper, we extend the scope to the quantum
computing domain and propose corresponding quantum algorithms for this problem.
Our study demonstrates that the proposed quantum algorithms yield a polynomial
speedup compared to the classical algorithms for learning the structure of
these two classes of RBMs.


Category: hep-th
Title: Confinement Slingshot and Gravitational Waves
Authors: Maximilian Bachmaier, Gia Dvali, Juan Sebastián Valbuena-Bermúdez, Michael Zantedeschi
Date: 2023-09-25T14:54:27Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we introduce and numerically simulate a quantum field
theoretic phenomenon called the gauge ``slingshot" effect and study its
production of gravitational waves. The effect occurs when a source, such as a
magnetic monopole or a quark, crosses the boundary between the Coulomb and
confining phases. The corresponding gauge field of the source, either electric
or magnetic, gets confined into a flux tube stretching in the form of a string
(cosmic or a QCD type) that attaches the source to the domain wall separating
the two phases. The string tension accelerates the source towards the wall as
sort of a slingshot. The slingshot phenomenon is also exhibited by various
sources of other co-dimensionality, such as cosmic strings confined by domain
walls or vortices confined by $Z_2$ strings. Apart from the field-theoretic
value, the slingshot effect has important cosmological implications, as it
provides a distinct source for gravitational waves. The effect is expected to
be generic in various extensions of the standard model such as grand
unification.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Torque on a Non-Reciprocal Body out of Thermal Equilibrium and
  Induced by a Magnetic Field of Arbitrary Strength
Authors: Gerard Kennedy
Date: 2023-09-25T14:51:08Z
Abstract:   A stationary body that is out of thermal equilibrium with its environment,
and for which the electric susceptibility is non-reciprocal, experiences a
quantum torque. This arises from the spatially non-symmetric electrical
response of the body to its interaction with the non-equilibrium thermal
fluctuations of the electromagnetic field: the non-equilibrium nature of the
thermal field fluctuations results in a net energy flow through the body, and
the spatially non-symmetric nature of the electrical response of the body to
its interaction with these field fluctuations causes that energy flow to be
transformed into a rotational motion. We establish an exact, closed-form,
analytical expression for this torque in the case that the environment is the
vacuum and the material of the body is described by a damped oscillator model,
where the non-reciprocal nature of the electric susceptibility is induced by an
external magnetic field, as for magneto-optical media. We also generalise this
expression to the context in which the body is slowly rotating. By exploring
the high-temperature expansion of the torque, we are able to identify the
separate contributions from the continuous spectral distribution of the
non-reciprocal electric susceptibility, and from the resonance modes. In
particular, we find that the torque persists in the limiting case of zero
damping parameter, due to the contribution of the resonance modes. We also
consider the low-temperature expansion of the torque. This work extends our
previous consideration of this model to an external magnetic field of arbitrary
strength, thereby including non-linear magnetic field effects.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum Torque on a Non-Reciprocal Body out of Thermal Equilibrium and
  Induced by a Magnetic Field of Arbitrary Strength
Authors: Gerard Kennedy
Date: 2023-09-25T14:51:08Z
Abstract:   A stationary body that is out of thermal equilibrium with its environment,
and for which the electric susceptibility is non-reciprocal, experiences a
quantum torque. This arises from the spatially non-symmetric electrical
response of the body to its interaction with the non-equilibrium thermal
fluctuations of the electromagnetic field: the non-equilibrium nature of the
thermal field fluctuations results in a net energy flow through the body, and
the spatially non-symmetric nature of the electrical response of the body to
its interaction with these field fluctuations causes that energy flow to be
transformed into a rotational motion. We establish an exact, closed-form,
analytical expression for this torque in the case that the environment is the
vacuum and the material of the body is described by a damped oscillator model,
where the non-reciprocal nature of the electric susceptibility is induced by an
external magnetic field, as for magneto-optical media. We also generalise this
expression to the context in which the body is slowly rotating. By exploring
the high-temperature expansion of the torque, we are able to identify the
separate contributions from the continuous spectral distribution of the
non-reciprocal electric susceptibility, and from the resonance modes. In
particular, we find that the torque persists in the limiting case of zero
damping parameter, due to the contribution of the resonance modes. We also
consider the low-temperature expansion of the torque. This work extends our
previous consideration of this model to an external magnetic field of arbitrary
strength, thereby including non-linear magnetic field effects.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Error and Disturbance as Irreversibility with Applications: Unified
  Definition, Wigner--Araki--Yanase Theorem and Out-of-Time-Order Correlator
Authors: Haruki Emori, Hiroyasu Tajima
Date: 2023-09-25T14:29:31Z
Abstract:   Error and disturbance are fundamental concepts in quantum measurements. Here
we show that these two concepts can be defined as special cases of the
irreversibility of quantum processes. The re-definitions provide fruitful
byproducts: First, we can unify the existing various definitions of error and
disturbance as special aspects of irreversibility. Second, we extend the
quantitative Wigner--Araki--Yanase theorem -- a universal restriction on
measurement implementation under a conservation law -- to error and disturbance
of arbitrary definitions. Third, we provide a novel treatment of
out-of-time-orderd-correlator (OTOC) -- a measure of quantum chaos in a quantum
many-body system -- as irreversibility, and its experimental evaluation method.


Category: hep-th
Title: Error and Disturbance as Irreversibility with Applications: Unified
  Definition, Wigner--Araki--Yanase Theorem and Out-of-Time-Order Correlator
Authors: Haruki Emori, Hiroyasu Tajima
Date: 2023-09-25T14:29:31Z
Abstract:   Error and disturbance are fundamental concepts in quantum measurements. Here
we show that these two concepts can be defined as special cases of the
irreversibility of quantum processes. The re-definitions provide fruitful
byproducts: First, we can unify the existing various definitions of error and
disturbance as special aspects of irreversibility. Second, we extend the
quantitative Wigner--Araki--Yanase theorem -- a universal restriction on
measurement implementation under a conservation law -- to error and disturbance
of arbitrary definitions. Third, we provide a novel treatment of
out-of-time-orderd-correlator (OTOC) -- a measure of quantum chaos in a quantum
many-body system -- as irreversibility, and its experimental evaluation method.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Dual-GSE: Resource-efficient Generalized Quantum Subspace Expansion
Authors: Bo Yang, Nobuyuki Yoshioka, Hiroyuki Harada, Shigeo Hakkaku, Yuuki Tokunaga, Hideaki Hakoshima, Kaoru Yamamoto, Suguru Endo
Date: 2023-09-25T14:28:40Z
Abstract:   Quantum error mitigation (QEM) is a class of hardware-efficient error
reduction methods through additional modest quantum operations and classical
postprocessing on measurement outcomes. The generalized quantum subspace
expansion (GSE) has been recently proposed as a unified framework of two
distinct QEM methods: quantum subspace expansion (QSE) and purification-based
QEM. GSE takes over the advantages of these two methods, achieving the
mitigation of both coherent and stochastic errors. However, GSE still requires
multiple copies of quantum states and entangled measurements between the
copies, as required in purification-based QEM. This is a significant drawback
under the current situation of the restricted number and connectivity of
qubits. In this work, we propose a resource-efficient implementation of GSE,
which we name "Dual-GSE", circumventing significant overheads of state copies
by constructing an ansatz of error-mitigated quantum states via dual-state
purification. Remarkably, Dual-GSE can further simulate larger quantum systems
beyond the size of available quantum hardware with a suitable ansatz
construction inspired by those divide-and-conquer methods that forge
entanglement classically. This also contributes to a significant reduction of
the measurement overhead because we only need to measure subsystems' Pauli
operators. The proposed method is demonstrated by numerical simulation of the
eight-qubit transverse field Ising model, showing that our method estimates the
ground state energy in high precision under gate noise with low mitigation
overhead and practical sampling cost.


Category: quant-ph
Title: An optimized quantum minimum searching algorithm with sure-success
  probability and its experiment simulation with Cirq
Authors: Wenjie Liu, Qingshan Wu, Jiahao Shen, Jiaojiao Zhao, Mohammed Zidan, Lian Tong
Date: 2023-09-25T14:07:27Z
Abstract:   Finding a minimum is an essential part of mathematical models, and it plays
an important role in some optimization problems. Durr and Hoyer proposed a
quantum searching algorithm (DHA), with a certain probability of success, to
achieve quadratic speed than classical ones. In this paper, we propose an
optimized quantum minimum searching algorithm with sure-success probability,
which utilizes Grover-Long searching to implement the optimal exact searching,
and the dynamic strategy to reduce the iterations of our algorithm. Besides, we
optimize the oracle circuit to reduce the number of gates by the simplified
rules. The performance evaluation including the theoretical success rate and
computational complexity shows that our algorithm has higher accuracy and
efficiency than DHA algorithm. Finally, a simulation experiment based on Cirq
is performed to verify its feasibility.


Category: quant-ph
Title: The Generalized Capacity of a Quantum Channel
Authors: Zahra Baghali Khanian
Date: 2023-09-25T13:52:19Z
Abstract:   The transmission of classical information over a classical channel gave rise
to the classical capacity theorem with the optimal rate in terms of the
classical mutual information. Despite classical information being a subset of
quantum information, the rate of the quantum capacity problem is expressed in
terms of the coherent information, which does not mathematically generalize the
classical mutual information. Additionally, there are multiple capacity
theorems with distinct formulas when dealing with transmitting information over
a noisy quantum channel. This leads to the question of what constitutes a
mathematically accurate quantum generalization of classical mutual information
and whether there exists a quantum task that directly extends the classical
capacity problem. In this paper, we address these inquiries by introducing a
quantity called the generalized information, which serves as a mathematical
extension encompassing both classical mutual information and coherent
information. We define a transmission task, which includes as specific
instances both classical information and quantum information capacity problems,
and show that the transmission capacity of this task is characterized by the
generalized information.


Category: quant-ph
Title: On the Radial and Angular Correlations in a Confined System of Two Atoms
  in Two-Dimensional Geometry
Authors: Przemysław Kościk
Date: 2023-09-25T13:15:00Z
Abstract:   We analyzed a system of two bosonic atoms in an isotropic two-dimensional
harmonic trap with a finite-range soft-core interaction model. We carefully
examined the correlation properties of this system across a wide range of
control parameter values. Our findings revealed that in the presence of
repulsion, the ground state could be well represented by the product of
functions involving the radial and angular coordinates, independent of the
interaction range. As a result, correlations between atoms divide into radial
and angular correlations, which enables us to treat them independently and gain
valuable insights into their behaviors. Our results show that these
correlations highly depend on system parameter values.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Non-Hermitian Mott Skin Effect
Authors: Tsuneya Yoshida, Song-Bo Zhang, Titus Neupert, Norio Kawakami
Date: 2023-09-25T13:10:07Z
Abstract:   We propose a novel type of skin effects in non-Hermitian quantum many-body
systems which we dub a non-Hermitian Mott skin effect. This phenomenon is
induced by the interplay between strong correlations and the non-Hermitian
point-gap topology. The Mott skin effect induces extreme sensitivity to the
boundary conditions only in the spin degree of freedom (i.e., the charge
distribution is not sensitive to boundary conditions), which is in sharp
contrast to the ordinary non-Hermitian skin effect in non-interacting systems.
Concretely, we elucidate that a bosonic non-Hermitian chain exhibits the Mott
skin effect in the strongly correlated regime by closely examining an effective
Hamiltonian. The emergence of the Mott skin effect is also supported by
numerical diagonalization of the bosonic chain. The difference between the
ordinary non-Hermitian skin effect and the Mott skin effect is also reflected
in the time-evolution of physical quantities; under the time-evolution spin
accumulation is observed while the charge distribution remains spatially
uniform.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Dunkl-Pauli Equation
Authors: H. Bouguerne, B. Hamil, B. C. Lütfüoğlu, M. Merad
Date: 2023-09-25T12:14:56Z
Abstract:   The Pauli equation, an important equation of quantum mechanics, allows us to
study the dynamics of spin-$1/2$ particles. The Dunkl derivative, when used
instead of the ordinary derivative, allows us to obtain parity-dependent
solutions. In this work, we consider a two-dimensional nonrelativistic
spin-$1/2$ particle system in the presence of an external magnetic field, and
we explore the system's dynamics by solving the Pauli equation in the Dunkl
formalism analytically. Then, we assume the system to be in thermal
equilibrium, so that, we examine various thermal quantities of the system.


Category: hep-th
Title: Rényi Topology of Charged-flat Black Hole: Hawking-Page and
  Van-der-Waals Phase Transitions
Authors: F. Barzi, H. El Moumni, K. Masmar
Date: 2023-09-25T12:04:03Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we extend the proposed setup in [1,2] for finding the
topological charges associated with the Hawking-Page and Van-der-Waals
transition points as well as equilibrium phases to catch the nonextensive
nature of the black hole entropy, Rigorously speaking we incorporate the
R\'enyi statistics formalism in off-shell Bragg-Williams free energy landscape
to examine topologically the Hawking-Page phase transition related to the
uncharged/charged-flat black hole in grand canonical and the Van-der- Waals
transition in the canonical ensemble and where a vortex/anti-vortex structure
is found. For this purpose, we introduce three mappings, the $\psi$- and
$\xi$-mapping, for phase transitions classification and the $\eta$-mapping for
equilibrium phases classification. We found that Hawking-Page and Van-der-Waals
phase transitions belong to different topological classes and exhibit an
interplay of total charge values hinting to a possible new correspondence. Our
topological study provides further substantiation for a possible conjecture
positing a correspondence between the thermodynamic characteristics of black
holes in asymptotically flat spacetime using R\'enyi statistics, and those in
asymptotically Anti-de-Sitter spacetime employing Gibbs-Boltzmann statistics.


Category: hep-th
Title: (Anti-)BRST Symmetries in FLRW Model: Supervariable Approach
Authors: Aradhya Shukla, Dharm Veer Singh, R. Kumar
Date: 2023-09-25T12:01:45Z
Abstract:   We derive the off-shell nilpotent and absolutely anticommuting (anti-)BRST
symmetry transformations corresponding to the local time-reparametrization
symmetry transformation of the $(0+1)$-dimensional (1D) diffeomorphism (i.e.
time-reparameterization) invariant FRLW model within the framework of
supervariable approach BRST formalism. An application of (super-)diffeomorphism
invariance yields horizontality conditions. The celebrated CF-type of condition
which emerges as an off-shoot of the horizontality condition provides the
absolute anticommutativity of the (anti-)BRST transformations. In addition,
this CF-type condition is required for the derivation of coupled (but
equivalent) Lagrangians. We also capture the (anti-)BRST invariance of the
Lagrangians in terms of the Grassmannian translational generators and
supervariables.


Category: hep-th
Title: Impacts of Gravitational-Wave Background from Supermassive Black Hole
  Binaries on the Detection of Compact Binaries by LISA
Authors: Fan Huang, Yan-Chen Bi, Zhoujian Cao, Qing-Guo Huang
Date: 2023-09-25T11:21:24Z
Abstract:   In the frequency band of Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA), extensive
research has been conducted on the impact of foreground confusion noise
generated by galactic binaries within the Milky Way galaxy. Additionally, the
recent evidence for a stochastic signal, announced by the NANOGrav, EPTA, PPTA,
CPTA and InPTA, indicates that the stochastic gravitational-wave background
generated by supermassive black hole binaries (SMBHBs) can contribute a strong
background noise within in LISA band. Given the presence of such strong noise,
it is expected to have a considerable impacts on LISA's scientific missions. In
this work, we investigate the impacts of the SGWB generated by SMBHBs on the
detection of massive black hole binaries (MBHBs), verified galactic binaries
(VGBs) and extreme mass ratio inspirals (EMRIs) in the context of LISA, and
find it crucial to resolve and eliminate the exceed noise from the SGWB to
ensure the success of LISA's missions.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Making topologically trivial non-Hermitian systems non-trivial via gauge
  fields
Authors: W. B. Rui, Y. X. Zhao, Z. D. Wang
Date: 2023-09-25T11:19:15Z
Abstract:   Non-Hermiticity significantly enriches the concepts of symmetry and topology
in physics. Particularly, non-Hermiticity gives rise to the ramified
symmetries, where the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian $H$ is transformed to
$H^\dagger$. For time-reversal ($T$) and sublattice symmetries, there are six
ramified symmetry classes leading to novel topological classifications with
various non-Hermitian skin effects. As artificial crystals are the main
experimental platforms for non-Hermitian physics, there exists the symmetry
barrier for realizing topological physics in the six ramified symmetry classes:
While artificial crystals are in spinless classes with $T^2=1$, nontrivial
classifications dominantly appear in spinful classes with $T^2=-1$. Here, we
present a general mechanism to cross the symmetry barrier. With an internal
parity symmetry $P$, the square of the combination $\tilde{T}=PT$ can be
modified by appropriate gauge fluxes. Using the general mechanism, we
systematically construct spinless models for all non-Hermitian spinful
topological phases in one and two dimensions, which are experimentally
realizable. Our work suggests that gauge structures may significantly enrich
non-Hermitian physics at the fundamental level.


Category: hep-th
Title: Taking the Null-Hypersurface Limit in the Parikh-Wilczek Membrane
  Approach
Authors: A. M. Arslanaliev, A. J. Nurmagambetov
Date: 2023-09-25T11:03:41Z
Abstract:   We consider subtleties of the horizon (null-hypersurface) limit in the
Parikh-Wilczek Membrane Approach to Black Holes. Specifically, we refine the
correspondence between the (projected) Einstein equations of gravity with
matter and the Raychaudhuri-Damour-Navier-Stokes (RDNS) equations of
relativistic hydrodynamics. For a general configuration of gravity with matter
we obtain additional terms in the hydrodynamic equations, which include
logarithmic derivarives of a parameter (the regularization function)
determining the proximity of a stretched membrane to the BH horizon. Direct
computation of the new terms for exact (Schwarzschild and Kerr) solutions to
the Einstein equations results in vanishing the additions to the RDNS equations
in the horizon limit. For spacetimes, which are not exact solutions to the
Einstein equations, as, for instance, for space-time configurations mimicking
black holes, taking into account new terms in the RDNS equations is the
mandatory operation. We also comment the correspondence between the horizon
limit of the Parikh-Wilczek Membrane Approach and the Gourgoulhon-Jaramillo
method of a null-hypersurface description, as well as the link of the obtained
results to our previous work on the Kerr black holes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A Set-Theoretic Metaphysics for Quantum Mechanics
Authors: Paul Tappenden
Date: 2023-09-25T10:12:21Z
Abstract:   Set theory brought revolution to philosophy of mathematics and it can bring
revolution to philosophy of physics too. All that stands in the way is the
intuition that sets of physical objects cannot themselves be physical objects,
which appears to depend on the ubiquitous assumption that it is possible for
there to exist numerically distinct observers in qualitatively identical mental
states. Overturning that assumption opens the way to construing an object in
superposition in an observers environment as a set of objects in definite
states. The components of the superposition are subsets for which all the
elements are in the same definite state. So an environmental z-spin-up electron
becomes a set of elemental electrons each of which has definite spin for one
orientation but lacks indefinite spin for other orientations. The environmental
z-spin-up electron has subsets of elemental electrons for every orientation but
it is only the subset with spins on the z-axis for which all the elements of
the subset have the same value, namely spin-up. The subset of elemental
electrons with spins on the x-axis has subsets of spin-up and spin-down
elemental electrons of equal measure. Observers only detect the spins of
environmental electrons, not those of elemental electrons.


Category: hep-th
Title: CFT correlators and mapping class group averages
Authors: Iordanis Romaidis, Ingo Runkel
Date: 2023-09-25T10:06:16Z
Abstract:   Mapping class group averages appear in the study of 3D gravity partition
functions. In this paper, we work with 3D topological field theories to
establish a bulk-boundary correspondence between such averages and correlators
of 2D rational CFTs whose chiral mapping class group representations are
irreducible and satisfy a finiteness property. We show that Ising-type modular
fusion categories satisfy these properties on surfaces with or without field
insertions, extending results in [Jian et al., JHEP 10 (2020) 129], and we
comment on the absence of invertible global symmetries in the examples we
consider.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Many-photon scattering and entangling in a waveguide with a
  Λ-type atom
Authors: Denis Ilin, Alexander V. Poshakinskiy
Date: 2023-09-25T09:06:28Z
Abstract:   We develop the analytical theory that describes simultaneous transmission of
several photons through a waveguide coupled to a $\Lambda$-type atom. We show
that after transmission of a short few-photon pulse, the final state of the
atom and all the photons is a genuine multipartite entangled state belonging to
the W class. The parameters of the input pulse are optimized to maximize the
efficiency of three- and four-partite W-state production.


Category: quant-ph
Title: No free lunch theorems for quantum state measurements as resources in
  classical sampling and generative modelling
Authors: Steven Herbert
Date: 2023-09-25T09:05:16Z
Abstract:   We prove that $\textit{almost all}$ quantum states, when sampled according to
the Haar measure over the unitary group, have the following property: if copies
of the state are measured to provide latent random variables which are taken as
an input in a classical generative model or sampling algorithm, then any
alternative state whose measurements can generate the same set of target
distributions will do so with the same overall cost. Here, we define the
overall cost as the aggregate computational complexity of sampling from all
possible distributions that can be prepared from the given input distribution.
Our result holds for any length of input and output bitstring and when a
uniformly random bitstring of any length is optionally provided as an
additional resource. As it is easy to construct scenarios where a pair of
alternative candidate states are such that classical simulation of the
preparation thereof is easy in one case and hard in the other, the result can
be viewed as decoupling how hard it is to obtain a latent random variable, and
how useful it is as a resource in classical sampling and generative modelling.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Hierarchies for Semidefinite Optimization in
  $\mathcal{C}^\star$-Algebras
Authors: Gereon Koßmann, René Schwonnek, Jonathan Steinberg
Date: 2023-09-25T09:01:30Z
Abstract:   Semidefinite Optimization has become a standard technique in the landscape of
Mathematical Programming that has many applications in finite dimensional
Quantum Information Theory. This paper presents a way for finite-dimensional
relaxations of general cone programs on $\mathcal{C}^\star$-algebras which have
structurally similar properties to ordinary cone programs, only putting the
notion of positivity at the core of optimization. We show that well-known
hierarchies for generalized problems like NPA but also Lasserre's hierarchy and
to some extend symmetry reductions of generic SDPs by de-Klerk et al. can be
considered from a general point of view of $\mathcal{C}^\star$-algebras in
combination to optimization problems.


Category: quant-ph
Title: A hybrid quantum-classical approach to warm-starting optimization
Authors: Vanessa Dehn, Thomas Wellens
Date: 2023-09-25T08:53:54Z
Abstract:   The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is a promising
candidate for solving combinatorial optimization problems more efficiently than
classical computers. Recent studies have shown that warm-starting the standard
algorithm improves the performance. In this paper we compare the performance of
standard QAOA with that of warm-start QAOA in the context of portfolio
optimization and investigate the warm-start approach for different problem
instances. In particular, we analyze the extent to which the improved
performance of warm-start QAOA is due to quantum effects, and show that the
results can be reproduced or even surpassed by a purely classical preprocessing
of the original problem followed by standard QAOA.


Category: hep-th
Title: Singular limits of spacetimes and their isometries
Authors: Eric Bergshoeff, Javier Matulich, Tomás Ortín
Date: 2023-09-25T08:27:24Z
Abstract:   We consider spacetime metrics with a given (but quite generic) dependence on
a dimensionful parameter such that in the 0 and infinity limits of that
parameter the metric becomes singular. We study the isometry groups of the
original spacetime metrics and of the singular metrics that arise in the limits
and the corresponding symmetries of the motion of p-branes evolving in them,
showing how the Killing vectors and their Lie algebras can be found in general.
We illustrate our general results with several examples which include limits of
anti-de Sitter spacetime in which the holographic screen is one of the singular
metrics and of pp-waves.


Category: hep-th
Title: Observational constraints on interactions between dark energy and dark
  matter with momentum and energy transfers
Authors: Xiaolin Liu, Shinji Tsujikawa, Kiyotomo Ichiki
Date: 2023-09-25T08:26:51Z
Abstract:   We place observational constraints on a dark energy (DE) model in which a
quintessence scalar field $\phi$ is coupled to dark matter (DM) through
momentum and energy exchanges. The momentum transfer is weighed by an
interaction between the field derivative and DM four velocity with a coupling
constant $\beta$, whereas the energy exchange is characterized by an
exponential scalar-field coupling to the DM density with a coupling constant
$Q$. A positive coupling $\beta$ leads to the suppression for the growth of DM
density perturbations at low redshifts, whose property offers a possibility for
resolving the $\sigma_8$ tension problem. A negative coupling $Q$ gives rise to
a $\phi$-matter-dominated epoch, whose presence can reduce the sound horizon
around the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) decoupling epoch. Using the data
of Planck 2018, 12-th Sloan Digital Sky Survey, Phantheon supernovae samples,
and 1-year dark energy survey, we find that the two couplings are constrained
to be $\beta=0.417^{+1.592}_{-0.307}$ and $Q =-0.036^{+0.036}_{-0.010}$ at
68\,\% confidence level (CL). Thus, there is an interesting observational
signature of the momentum exchange ($\beta \neq 0$) between DE and DM, with a
peak of the probability distribution of the energy transfer coupling at $Q<0$.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Measuring the quantum state of photoelectrons
Authors: Hugo Laurell, Sizuo Luo, Robin Weissenbilder, Mattias Ammitzböll, Shahnawaz Ahmed, Hugo Söderberg, C. Leon M. Petersson, Vénus Poulain, Chen Guo, Christoph Dittel, Daniel Finkelstein-Shapiro, Richard J. Squibb, Raimund Feifel, Mathieu Gisselbrecht, Cord L. Arnold, Andreas Buchleitner, Eva Lindroth, Anton Frisk Kockum, Anne L'Huillier, David Busto
Date: 2023-09-25T08:25:28Z
Abstract:   A photoelectron, emitted due to the absorption of light quanta as described
by the photoelectric effect, is often characterized experimentally by a
classical quantity, its momentum. However, since the photoelectron is a quantum
object, its rigorous characterization requires the reconstruction of the
complete quantum state, the photoelectron's density matrix. Here, we use
quantum state tomography to fully characterize photoelectrons emitted from
helium and argon atoms upon absorption of ultrashort, extreme ultraviolet light
pulses. While in helium we measure a pure photoelectronic state, in argon,
spin-orbit interaction induces entanglement between the ion and the
photoelectron, leading to a reduced purity of the photoelectron state. Our work
shows how state tomography gives new insights into the fundamental quantum
aspects of light-induced electronic processes in matter, bridging the fields of
photoelectron spectroscopy and quantum information, and offering new
spectroscopic possibilities for quantum technology.


Category: hep-th
Title: Fractional cosmic strings
Authors: Sebastien Fumeron, Malte Henkel, Alexander Lopez
Date: 2023-09-25T08:05:36Z
Abstract:   Topological defects in the framework of effective quantum gravity model are
investigated, based on the hypothesis of an effective fractal dimension of the
universe. This is done by using Caputo fractional derivatives to determine the
time-space geometry of a fractional cosmic string. Several results for the
propagation of light are discussed, notably the light deviation angle due to
the defect and the geodesics of light.


Category: quant-ph
Title: ZZ-Interaction-Free Single-Qubit-Gate Optimization in Superconducting
  Qubits
Authors: Shu Watanabe, Yutaka Tabuchi, Kentaro Heya, Shuhei Tamate, Yasunobu Nakamura
Date: 2023-09-25T07:49:27Z
Abstract:   Overcoming the issue of qubit-frequency fluctuations is essential to realize
stable and practical quantum computing with solid-state qubits. Static ZZ
interaction, which causes a frequency shift of a qubit depending on the state
of neighboring qubits, is one of the major obstacles to integrating
fixed-frequency transmon qubits. Here we propose and experimentally demonstrate
ZZ-interaction-free single-qubit-gate operations on a superconducting transmon
qubit by utilizing a semi-analytically optimized pulse based on a perturbative
analysis. The gate is designed to be robust against slow qubit-frequency
fluctuations. The robustness of the optimized gate spans a few MHz, which is
sufficient for suppressing the adverse effects of the ZZ interaction. Our
result paves the way for an efficient approach to overcoming the issue of ZZ
interaction without any additional hardware overhead.


Category: quant-ph
Title: All-electron $\mathrm{\textit{ab-initio}}$ hyperfine coupling of Si-,
  Ge- and Sn-vacancy defects in diamond
Authors: Akib Karim, Harish H. Vallabhapurapu, Chris Adambukulam, Arne Laucht, Salvy P. Russo, Alberto Peruzzo
Date: 2023-09-25T07:29:47Z
Abstract:   Colour centres in diamond are attractive candidates for numerous quantum
applications due to their good optical properties and long spin coherence
times. They also provide access to the even longer coherence of hyperfine
coupled nuclear spins in their environment. While the NV centre is well
studied, both in experiment and theory, the hyperfine couplings in the more
novel centres (SiV, GeV, and SnV) are still largely unknown. Here we report on
the first all-electron \textit{ab-initio} calculations of the hyperfine
constants for SiV, GeV, and SnV defects in diamond, both for the respective
defect atoms ($^{29}$Si, $^{73}$Ge, $^{117}$Sn, $^{119}$Sn), as well as for the
surrounding $^{13}$C atoms. Furthermore, we calculate the nuclear quadrupole
moments of the GeV defect. We vary the Hartree-Fock mixing parameter for
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange correlation functional and show that the
hyperfine couplings of the defect atoms have a linear dependence on the mixing
percentage. We calculate the inverse dielectric constant to predict an
\textit{ab-initio} mixing percentage. The final hyperfine coupling predictions
are close to the experimental values available in the literature. Our results
will help to guide future novel experiments on these defects.


Category: hep-th
Title: Integrability of N=1 supersymmetric Ruijsenaars-Schneider three-body
  system
Authors: Anton Galajinsky
Date: 2023-09-25T06:10:26Z
Abstract:   An N=1 supersymmetric extension of the Ruijsenaars-Schneider three-body model
is constructed and its integrability is established. In particular, three
functionally independent Grassmann-odd constants of the motion are given and
their algebraic resolvability is proven. The supersymmetric generalization is
used to build a novel integrable isospin extension of the Ruijsenaars-Schneider
three-body system.


Category: hep-th
Title: Massless Rotating Spacetimes in Four-Dimensional Horava Gravity
Authors: Mu-In Park, Hyung Won Lee
Date: 2023-09-25T04:04:09Z
Abstract:   We study a particular exact solution for rotating spacetimes in
four-dimensional Horava gravity, which has been proposed as a renormalizable
gravity model without the ghost problem. We show that the massless Kerr
spacetime or the massless Kerr-(A)dS spacetime in Einstein gravity is an exact
solution in four-dimensional Horava for an arbitrary IR Lorentz-violation
parameter lambda, but with an appropriate cosmological constant. In particular,
for the massless topological Kerr-AdS black hole solution with the hyperbolic
horizon topology or the massless Kerr-dS cosmological solution with the
spherical horizon topology, there exist the ergosphere and the non-vanishing
Hawking temperature, which imply the existence of negative mass black holes as
well as positive mass spacetimes, by losing its mass from the massless ones via
the Hawking radiation or Penrose process in the ergosphere.


Category: hep-th
Title: Dimensional Reduction of the $S^3$/WZW Duality
Authors: Kenta Suzuki, Yusuke Taki
Date: 2023-09-25T03:44:36Z
Abstract:   Recently proposed duality relates the critical level limit $\hat{k} \to -2$
of $SU(2)_{\hat{k}}$ WZW models to a classical three-dimensional Einstein
gravity on a sphere. In this paper, we propose a dimensional reduced version of
this duality. The gravity side is reduced to a Jackiw-Teitelboim (JT) gravity
on $S^2$ with a non-standard boundary term, or a BF theory with $SU(2)$ gauge
symmetry. At least in low temperature limit, these two-dimensional gravity
theories completely capture the original three-dimensional gravity effect. The
CFT side is reduced to a certain complex Liouville quantum mechanics (LQM) with
$SU(2)$ gauge symmetry. Our proposal gives an interesting example of a
holography without boundary. We also discuss a higher-spin generalization with
$SU(N)$ gauge symmetry.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Controllable Operations of Edge States in Cross-One-dimensional
  Topological Chains
Authors: Xian-Liang Lu, Ze-Liang Xiang
Date: 2023-09-25T03:17:46Z
Abstract:   Topological edge states are recently attracting intense interest due to their
robustness in the presence of disorder and defects. However, most approaches
for manipulating such states require global modulations of the system's
Hamiltonian. In this work, we develop a method to control edge states using
local interactions of a four-node junction between cross-one-dimensional
topological atomic chains. These junction interactions can give rise to tunable
couplings between the hybridized edge states within different geometric
symmetry, allowing us to implement robust quantum state transfer and SWAP gate
between the two topological chains, where the edge states are pair-encoded as a
single qubit. Moreover, when the atoms are precisely positioned to couple
waveguides, the correlated decay caused by the environment enables the
anti-symmetric edge states to present subradiant dynamics and thus show
extremely long coherence time. These findings open up new possibilities for
quantum technologies with topological edge states in the future.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Building a quantum superposition of conscious states with integrated
  information theory
Authors: Kelvin J. McQueen, Ian T. Durham, Markus P. Mueller
Date: 2023-09-25T02:15:24Z
Abstract:   Could there be a quantum superposition of consciousness, as in the Wigner's
friend thought experiment? The integrated information theory (IIT) of
consciousness has turned this into a well-defined question. According to IIT,
consciousness is a measurable physical quantity given by integrated information
($\Phi$), such that the amount of consciousness in a system corresponds to its
amount of $\Phi$. We use the most recent IIT formalism (IIT4.0) to analyze the
simplest non-zero $\Phi$ system known as a feedback dyad. We then propose a
circuit that puts the dyad into a superposition of states which, according to
IIT, would correspond to a superposition of conscious states. We refer to this
as "Schr\"odinger's dyad". We therefore show that either IIT is false or the
simple dyad is conscious and can easily be put into a superposition of
conscious states. We then identify the simplest possible consciousness-collapse
model, which predicts that this superposition is unstable and collapses at a
rate determined by a measure of difference between the superposed conscious
states. Our analysis will enable us to make a number of key observations about
the general structure of integrated information theory (IIT2.0, IIT3.0, IIT4.0,
and QIIT) and the general structure of consciousness-collapse models.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Of Representation Theory and Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
Authors: Boris Tsvelikhovskiy, Ilya Safro, Yuri Alexeev
Date: 2023-09-25T00:35:40Z
Abstract:   In this paper, the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is
analyzed by leveraging symmetries inherent in problem Hamiltonians. We focus on
the generalized formulation of optimization problems defined on the sets of
$n$-element $d$-ary strings. Our main contribution encompasses dimension
reductions for the originally proposed QAOA. These reductions retain the same
problem Hamiltonian as the original QAOA but differ in terms of their mixer
Hamiltonian, and initial state. The vast QAOA space has a daunting dimension of
exponential scaling in $n$, where certain reduced QAOA spaces exhibit
dimensions governed by polynomial functions. This phenomenon is illustrated in
this paper, by providing partitions corresponding to polynomial dimensions in
the corresponding subspaces. As a result, each reduced QAOA partition
encapsulates unique classical solutions absent in others, allowing us to
establish a lower bound on the number of solutions to the initial optimization
problem. Our novel approach opens promising practical advantages in
accelerating the class of QAOA approaches, both quantum-based and classical
simulation of circuits, as well as a potential tool to cope with barren
plateaus problem.


Category: hep-th
Title: Scalarized black holes in new massive gravity dressed by a nonminimally
  coupled scalar
Authors: Yun Soo Myung
Date: 2023-09-24T23:27:29Z
Abstract:   We investigate scalarized black holes in new massive gravity dressed by a
nonminimally coupled scalar. For this purpose, we find the Gregory-Laflamme and
tachyonic instabilities of bald BTZ black hole by making use of the linearized
theory around black hole. We obtain a solution bound of $0.161<\alpha <3/16$
for achieving non-BtZ black holes with scalar hair analytically and a
thermodynamic bound of $1/8<\alpha <13/80$ for obtaining consistent
thermodynamic quantities. Without imposing the GL instability bound
($m<0.7/\ell$), we find a very narrow bound of $0.161<\alpha<0.1625$ which is
located inside tachyonic instability bound of $\alpha>1/8+m^2_\Phi \ell^2/6$
for obtaining scalarized black holes.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Combinatorial summation of Feynman diagrams: Equation of state of the 2D
  SU(N) Hubbard model
Authors: Evgeny Kozik
Date: 2023-09-24T23:07:56Z
Abstract:   We introduce a universal framework for efficient summation of connected or
skeleton Feynman diagrams for generic quantum many-body systems. It is based on
explicit combinatorial construction of the sum of the integrands by dynamic
programming, at a computational cost that can be made only exponential in the
diagram order. We illustrate the technique by an unbiased diagrammatic Monte
Carlo calculation of the equation of state of the $2D$ $SU(N)$ Hubbard model in
an experimentally relevant regime, which has remained challenging for
state-of-the-art numerical methods.


Category: hep-th
Title: Combinatorial summation of Feynman diagrams: Equation of state of the 2D
  SU(N) Hubbard model
Authors: Evgeny Kozik
Date: 2023-09-24T23:07:56Z
Abstract:   We introduce a universal framework for efficient summation of connected or
skeleton Feynman diagrams for generic quantum many-body systems. It is based on
explicit combinatorial construction of the sum of the integrands by dynamic
programming, at a computational cost that can be made only exponential in the
diagram order. We illustrate the technique by an unbiased diagrammatic Monte
Carlo calculation of the equation of state of the $2D$ $SU(N)$ Hubbard model in
an experimentally relevant regime, which has remained challenging for
state-of-the-art numerical methods.


Category: hep-th
Title: Observational Signatures: Shadow cast by the effective metric of photons
  for black holes with rational non-linear electrodynamics
Authors: Akhil Uniyal, Sayan Chakrabarti, Mohsen Fathi, Ali Övgün
Date: 2023-09-24T16:08:15Z
Abstract:   This study explores spherically symmetric non-linear electrodynamics black
holes and their effects on light propagation. We derive the governing metric,
revealing radial coordinate dynamics within the event horizon. We analyze
photon trajectories, finding that increasing magnetic charge expands the
horizon and emission range. Using data from the Event Horizon Telescope, we
constrain parameters and emission profiles. Direct emission dominates, while
lensing rings play a lesser role. Comparing with Schwarzschild black holes, we
observe higher intensity but a wider emission region in non-linear
electrodynamics black holes. This work enhances our understanding of modified
spacetimes and their impact on black hole properties.


Category: hep-th
Title: Asymmetrical braneworlds and the charged lepton mass spectrum
Authors: Henrique Matheus Gauy, Alex E. Bernardini
Date: 2023-09-24T15:48:18Z
Abstract:   A braneworld mechanism for explaining the mass spectrum of the charged
leptons is proposed. Based on the existence of an asymmetric warp factor for a
$5+1$-dim braneworld scenario, the proper fractions between the masses of the
electron, muon and tauon are achieved. As a straightforward consequence, our
results coincide with the Koide's mass formula.


Category: hep-th
Title: Plebanśki-Demiański à la Ehlers-Harrison: Exact Rotating and
  Accelerating Type I Black Holes
Authors: José Barrientos, Adolfo Cisterna, Konstantinos Pallikaris
Date: 2023-09-24T14:50:07Z
Abstract:   Standard black holes of algebraic type D, namely, those encompassed in the
large Pleban\'ski-Demia\'nski family, have been recently shown to exhibit a
wide class of algebraically general generalizations. These type I spacetimes
emerge by applying Ehlers or Harrison transformations to any type D
accelerating seed. This work commences with a discussion about the properties
of the enhanced symmetry transformations in the Ernst formulation of
Einstein-Maxwell theory, specifically, with a detailed investigation of their
compositions. While Ehlers transformations are known to form a one-parameter
subgroup, also commuting with Harrison transformations, here we show that the
composition of two Harrison operations does not in general lead to a Harrison
one, rather to an Ehlers-Harrison composition with fixed Ehlers parameter.
Next, we introduce a qualitative picture of the most general type I
generalization of the Pleban\'ski-Demia\'nski family, dubbed "Enhanced
Pleban\'ski-Demia\'nski" spacetime, followed by the exact form of the solution
in the original coordinates given by Pleban\'ski and Demia\'nski, which we
obtain via the simultaneous action of an Ehlers and a Harrison transformation
on the neutral Pleban\'ski-Demia\'nski geometry. In order to make the physics
more transparent, we explicitly construct a rotating and accelerating black
hole which further has NUT parameter and electric charges, both of them
entering, not only the event horizon, but the Rindler horizons as well. This
solution is directly obtained in the physical coordinates recently proposed by
Podolsk\'y and Vr\'atny. Finally, an appendix is thoughtfully included,
providing readers with a user-friendly step-by-step guide to the Ernst
formalism, in an attempt to address and resolve various minor inconsistencies
frequently appearing in the relevant literature.


Category: hep-th
Title: The Possibility of Tachyons as Soliton Solutions in 3+1 Dimensions via
  $k$-field Models
Authors: Mohammad Mohammadi
Date: 2023-09-24T14:42:06Z
Abstract:   Tachyons or hypothetical faster-than-light (FTL) particles would fail the
principle of causality. Such particles may only be imagined when they have no
energy and momentum and, thus, no observable interaction. In this paper, we
show that the classical relativistic field theory with non-standard Lagrangian
densities ($k$-field models) does not rule out the existence of FTL
particle-like solutions (solitons) with zero energy and momentum in 3+1
dimensions. However, contrary to our expectation, we show that it is possible
to have k-field models that lead to energetic FTL soliton solutions in $3+1$
dimensions.


Category: hep-th
Title: Dynamics in fractal spaces
Authors: Eugenio Megias, Alireza K. Golmankhaneh, Airton Deppman
Date: 2023-09-24T12:59:42Z
Abstract:   This study investigates the interconnections between the traditional
Fokker-Planck Equation (FPE) and its fractal counterpart (FFPE), utilizing
fractal derivatives. By examining the continuous approximation of fractal
derivatives in the FPE, it derives the Plastino-Plastino Equation (PPE), which
is commonly associated with Tsallis Statistics. This work deduces the
connections between the entropic index and the geometric quantities related to
the fractal dimension. Furthermore, it analyzes the implications of these
relationships on the dynamics of systems in fractal spaces. In order to assess
the effectiveness of both equations, numerical solutions are compared within
the context of complex systems dynamics, specifically examining the behaviours
of quark-gluon plasma (QGP). The FFPE provides an appropriate description of
the dynamics of fractal systems by accounting for the fractal nature of the
momentum space, exhibiting distinct behaviours compared to the traditional FPE
due to the system's fractal nature. The findings indicate that the fractal
equation and its continuous approximation yield similar results in studying
dynamics, thereby allowing for interchangeability based on the specific problem
at hand.


Category: hep-th
Title: End of the World Perspective to BCFT
Authors: Kyung Kiu Kim, Sejin Kim, Jung Hun Lee, Chanyong Park, Yunseok Seo
Date: 2023-09-24T12:52:20Z
Abstract:   In this work, we study the end-of-the-world (EOW) branes anchored to the
boundaries of BCFT${}_2$ dual to the BTZ black hole. First, we explore the
thermodynamics of the boundary system consisting of the conformal boundary and
two EOW branes. This thermodynamics is extended by the tension appearing as the
effective cosmological constant of JT black holes on the EOW branes. The
tension contribution is identified with the shadow entropy equivalent to the
boundary entropy of the BCFT${}_2$. The thermodynamics of the JT black holes
and the bulk of BCFT${}_2$ can be combined into a novel grafted thermodynamics
based on the first law. Second, we focus on the observer's view of the EOW
branes by lowering the temperature. We show that the EOW branes generate a
scale called ``reefs" inside the horizon. This scale also appears in the
grafted thermodynamics. At high temperatures, observers on the EOW branes see
their respective event horizons. The reef starts to grow relatively to the
horizon size at the temperature, $T_{grow}$. As the temperature cools down the
reef area fills the entire interior of the JT black holes at the temperature
$T_{out}$. Then, the observers recognize their horizons disappear and see the
large density of the energy flux. At this temperature, the two JT regions
become causally connected. This connected spacetime has two asymptotic $AdS_2$
boundaries with a conformal matter. Also, we comment on the grafted
thermodynamics to higher dimensions in Appendix B.


Category: hep-th
Title: The algebrodynamics: super-conservative collective dynamics on a "Unique
  Worldline'' and the Hubble's law
Authors: Vladimir V. Kassandrov, Ildus Sh. Khasanov
Date: 2023-09-24T12:06:01Z
Abstract:   We study the properties of roots of a polynomial system of equations which
define a set of identical point particles located on a Unique Worldline (UW),
in the spirit of the old Wheeler-Feynman's conception. As a consequence of the
Vieta's formulas, a great number of conservation laws is fulfilled for
collective algebraic dynamics on the UW. These, besides the canonical ones,
include the laws with higher derivatives and those containing multi-particle
correlation terms as well. On the other hand, such a ``super-conservative''
dynamics turns to be manifestly Lorentz invariant and quite nontrivial. At
great values of ``cosmic time'' $t$ roots-particles demonstrate universal
recession (resembling that in the Milne's cosmology and simulating
``expansion'' of the Universe) for which the Hubble's law does hold true, with
Hubble parameter being inversely proportional to $t$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Shedding new light on the absence of fermionic superradiance and maximal
  infalling rate of fermions into a black hole
Authors: De-Chang Dai, Dejan Stojkovic
Date: 2023-09-24T00:17:08Z
Abstract:   Using the complete classification of the bases in the rotating black hole
background we separate superradiance from the Hawking effect. We first find
that there is spontaneous particle creation for fermions by the potential
outside the black hole horizon for the frequencies inside the superradiant
regime, i.e. $\omega<k\Omega_H$. However, these particles do not enhance the
total flux from the black hole. For the superradiance particle to became real,
its negative energy counterpart has to be canceled by the positive energy
Hawking radiation mode at the horizon. Since due to the Pauli's principle this
cancellation must be one-to-one, the superradiance effect cannot add anything
to the total black hole flux. For an extremal black hole, the Hawking
temperature is zero, horizon is not populated with thermal modes, and fermions
can be emitted through the superradiance mechanism. On the other hand, a
macroscopic flux of fermions infalling to the black hole is the opposite
process of Hawking radiation. A positive energy-infalling particle must cancel
out a negative energy thermal mode at the horizon, which leaves a net positive
energy mode that crosses the horizon. Since there is finite thermal particle
density at the horizon, this implies that there is a maximal fermion infalling
rate which is also controlled by the Hawking temperature.


Category: hep-th
Title: Integrable sigma models with complex and generalized complex structures
Authors: A. Rezaei-Aghdam, A. Taghavi
Date: 2023-09-23T15:55:08Z
Abstract:   We investigate conditions for having an integrable deformation of the general
sigma model on a manifold with complex structure; such that on a Lie group
these conditions are satisfied (using zeros of Nijenhuis tensor). Then we
extend this formalism to a manifold (and especially a Lie group) with
generalized complex structure.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantum Chaos and Pole-Skipping in Semi-Locally Critical IR
Authors: Hyun-Sik Jeong
Date: 2023-09-23T15:51:40Z
Abstract:   We investigate pole-skipping and its connection with quantum chaos,
emphasizing the role of the IR fixed point in the established relationship
between pole-skipping and a universal bound of the energy diffusion constant.
Using the holographic Gubser-Rocha model, which features a semi-locally
critical IR fixed point, we refine the pole-skipping argument to apply to
generic fixed points. Additionally, we explore the reconstruction of the full
hydrodynamic dispersion relation through pole-skipping. By considering
conditions in which the dispersion relation exhibits the energy diffusive mode
at low wave-vector and passes through a pole-skipping point, we propose an
effective heuristic approximation that relies on three physical quantities:
$(D_e, \, v_B, \, \lambda_L)$, determined from horizon data. Here, $D_e$
represents the energy diffusion constant, $v_B$ the butterfly velocity, and
$\lambda_L$ the Lyapunov exponent. Remarkably, this approximation demonstrates
excellent agreement with the quasi-normal mode, even extending its
applicability beyond the hydrodynamic regime.


Category: hep-th
Title: Axion-Neutrino Couplings, Late-time Phase Transitions and the Far
  Infrared Physics
Authors: V. K. Oikonomou
Date: 2023-09-23T15:31:10Z
Abstract:   The far infrared physics is a fascinating topic for theoretical physics,
since the foundation of quantum field theory and neutrinos seem to be strongly
related with the far infrared physics of our Universe. In this work we shall
explore the possibility of a late-time thermal phase transition caused by the
axion-neutrino interactions. The axion is assumed to be the misalignment axion
which is coupled primordially to a chiral symmetric neutrino. The chiral
symmetry is supposed to be broken either spontaneously or explicitly, and two
distinct phenomenological models of axion-neutrinos are constructed. The axion
behaves as cold dark matter during all its evolution eras, however if we assume
that the axion and the neutrino fields interact coherently in a classical way
as fields, or as ensembles, then we consider thermal effects in the axion
sector, due to the values of operators $\phi$ for the axion and $\bar{\nu}\nu$
due to the neutrinos. The thermal equilibrium between the two has no effect to
the axion effective potential for a wide temperature range. As we show,
contrary to the existing literature, the axion never becomes destabilized due
to the finite temperature effects, however if axion-Higgs higher order
non-renormalizable operators are present in the Lagrangian, the axion potential
is destabilized in the temperature range $T\sim 0.1\,$MeV down to $T\sim
0.01\,$eV and a first order phase transition takes place. The initial axion
vacuum decays to the energetically more favorable axion vacuum, and the latter
decays to the Higgs vacuum which is more preferable. This late-time phase
transition might take place in the redshift range $z\sim 385-37$ and thus it
may cause density fluctuations in the post-recombination era.


Category: hep-th
Title: Anisotropies of Diffusive Ultra-high Energy Cosmic Rays in $f(R)$
  Gravity Theory
Authors: Swaraj Pratim Sarmah, Umananda Dev Goswami
Date: 2023-09-23T10:01:04Z
Abstract:   Understanding the anisotropy of ultra high-energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) is
crucial for unraveling the origins and propagation mechanisms of these
enigmatic particles. In this work, we studied the dipolar anisotropy of UHECRs
in the diffusive regime by considering three cosmological models: the standard
$\Lambda$CDM model, $f(R)$ gravity power-law model and the Starobinsky model.
This work aims to see the role of the $f(R)$ gravity theory in understanding
the anisotropy of UHECRs without condoning the standard cosmology. We found
that the amplitude of the dipolar anisotropy is sensitive to these cosmological
models, with the $f(R)$ power-law model predicting the largest amplitude, while
the $\Lambda$CDM model predicting the smallest amplitude at most of the
energies in the range considered. The predicted amplitude of the Starobinsky
model lies within the range of the $\Lambda$CDM one. This work not only
provides a way for exploration of UHECRs anisotropy within different
cosmological contexts but also may pave the way for new avenues of research at
the intersection of high-energy astrophysics.


Category: hep-th
Title: Creation of Bound Half-Fermion Pairs by Solitons
Authors: Sapan Karki, Brett Altschul
Date: 2023-09-22T23:58:18Z
Abstract:   In the presence of topologically nontrivial bosonic field configurations, the
fermion number operator may take on fractional eigenvalues, because of the
existence of zero-energy fermion modes. The simplest examples of this occur in
1+1 dimensions, with zero modes attached to kink-type solitons. In the presence
of a kink-antikink pair, the two associated zero modes bifurcate into positive
and negative energy levels with energies $\pm ge^{-g\Delta}$, in terms of the
Yukawa coupling $g\ll 1$ and the distance $\Delta$ between the kink and
antikink centers. When the kink and antikink are moving, it seems that there
could be Landau-Zener-like transitions between these two fermionic modes, which
would be interpretable as the creation or annihilation of fermion-antifermion
pairs; however, with only two solitons in relative motion, this does not occur.
If a third solitary wave is introduced farther away to perturb the
kink-antikink system, a movement of the faraway kink can induce transitions
between the discrete fermion modes bound to the solitons. These state changes
can be interpreted globally as creation or destruction of a novel type of pair:
a half-fermion and a half-antifermion. The production of the half-integral
pairs will dominate over other particle production channels as long as the
solitary waves remain well separated, so that there is a manifold of discrete
fermion states whose energies are either zero or exponentially close to zero.


Category: hep-th
Title: Glimmers from the Axiverse
Authors: Naomi Gendler, David J. E. Marsh, Liam McAllister, Jakob Moritz
Date: 2023-09-22T19:01:37Z
Abstract:   We study axion-photon couplings in compactifications of type IIB string
theory. We find that these couplings are systematically suppressed compared to
the inverse axion periodicity, as a result of two effects. First, couplings to
the QED theta angle are suppressed for axion mass eigenstates that are light
compared to the mass scale set by stringy instantons on the cycle supporting
QED. Second, in compactifications with many axions the intersection matrix is
sparse, making kinetic mixing weak. We study the resulting phenomenology in an
ensemble of $200{,}000$ toy models constructed from the Kreuzer-Skarke database
up to the maximum Hodge number $h^{1,1}=491$. We examine freeze-in production
and decay of thermal axions, birefringence of the cosmic microwave background,
X-ray spectrum oscillations, and constraints on the QCD axion from supernovae.
We conclude that compactifications in this corner of the landscape involve many
invisible axions, as well as a handful that may be detectable via photon
couplings.


Category: hep-th
Title: Jordan-Wigner composite-fermion liquids in 2D quantum spin-ice
Authors: Leonardo Goller, Inti Sodemann Villadiego
Date: 2023-09-22T18:00:11Z
Abstract:   The Jordan-Wigner map in 2D is as an exact lattice regularization of the 2
pi-flux attachment to a hard-core boson (or spin-1/2) leading to a
composite-fermion particle. When the spin-1/2 model obeys ice rules this map
preserves locality, namely, local Rohkshar-Kivelson models of spins are mapped
onto local models of Jordan-Wigner/composite-fermions. Using this
composite-fermion dual representation of RK models, we construct spin-liquid
states by projecting Slater determinants onto the subspaces of the ice rules.
Interestingly, we find that these composite-fermions behave as ``dipolar"
partons for which the projective implementations of symmetries are very
different from standard ``point-like" partons. We construct interesting
examples of composite-fermion liquid states that respect all microscopic
symmetries of the RK model. In the six-vertex subspace, we constructed a
time-reversal and particle-hole-invariant state featuring two massless Dirac
nodes, which is a composite-fermion counterpart to the classic pi-flux state of
Abrikosov-Schwinger fermions in the square lattice. This state is a good ground
state candidate for a modified RK-like Hamiltonian of quantum spin-ice. In the
dimer subspace, we construct a state fearturing a composite Fermi surface but
with nesting instabilities towards ordered phases such as the columnar state.
We have also analyzed the low energy emergent gauge structure. If one ignores
confinement, the system would feature a U(1) x U(1) low energy gauge structure
with two associated gapless photon modes, but with the composite fermion
carrying gauge charge only for one photon and behaving as a gauge neutral
dipole under the other. These states are examples of pseudo-scalar U(1) spin
liquids where mirror and time-reversal symmetries act as particle-hole
conjugations, and the emergent magnetic fields are even under such
time-reversal or lattice mirror symmetries.


Category: hep-th
Title: Anharmonic Effects on the Squeezing of Axion Perturbations
Authors: Valentina Danieli, Takeshi Kobayashi, Nicola Bartolo, Sabino Matarrese, Matteo Viel
Date: 2023-09-22T18:00:04Z
Abstract:   It is assumed in standard cosmology that the Universe underwent a period of
inflation in its earliest phase, providing the seeds for structure formation
through vacuum fluctuations of the inflaton scalar field. These fluctuations
get stretched by the quasi-exponential expansion of the Universe and become
squeezed. From an observational point of view, if we consider Gaussian states,
the expectation value of physical quantities on a squeezed state is
indistinguishable from a classical average of a stochastic distribution. This
renders cosmological perturbations arising from quantum fluctuations of free
fields effectively identical to those with a classical origin. The cosmological
squeezing has been largely studied in the literature, however most works have
focused on nearly free fields. The aim of this paper is to deepen the
understanding of the quantum-to-classical transition considering the effect of
self-interactions. For this purpose, we study axion-like fields. In particular
we follow the evolution of the axion's fluctuation modes from the horizon exit
during inflation to the radiation-dominated epoch. We compute Bogoliubov
coefficients and squeezing parameters, which are linked to the axion particles
number and isocurvature perturbation. We find that the quantum mechanical
particle production and the squeezing of the perturbations are enhanced, if one
accounts for anharmonic effects, i.e., the effect of higher order terms in the
potential. This effect becomes particularly strong towards the hilltop of the
potential.


Category: hep-th
Title: Free fermions with dephasing and boundary driving: Bethe Ansatz results
Authors: Vincenzo Alba
Date: 2023-09-22T16:18:41Z
Abstract:   By employing the Lindblad equation, we derive the evolution of the two-point
correlator for a free-fermion chain of length $L$ subject to bulk dephasing and
boundary losses. We use the Bethe ansatz to diagonalize the Liouvillian
${\mathcal L}^{\scriptscriptstyle(2)}$ governing the dynamics of the
correlator. The majority of its energy levels are complex. Precisely,
$L(L-1)/2$ complex energies do not depend on dephasing, apart for a trivial
shift. The remaining complex levels are perturbatively related to the
dephasing-independent ones for large $L$. The long-time dynamics is governed by
a band of real energies, which contains an extensive number of levels. They
give rise to diffusive scaling at intermediate times, when boundaries can be
neglected. Moreover, they encode the breaking of diffusion at asymptotically
long times. Interestingly, for large loss rate two boundary modes appear in the
spectrum. The real energies correspond to string solutions of the Bethe
equations, and can be treated effectively for large chains. This allows us to
derive compact formulas for the dynamics of the fermionic density. We check our
results against exact diagonalization, finding perfect agreement.


Category: hep-th
Title: One continuous parameter family of Dirac Lorentz scalar potentials
  associated with exceptional orthogonal polynomials
Authors: Suman Banerjee, Rajesh Kumar Yadav
Date: 2023-09-22T16:02:35Z
Abstract:   We extend our recent works [ Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 38 (2023) 2350069-1] and
obtain one parameter $(\lambda)$ family of rationally extended Dirac Lorentz
scalar potentials with their explicit solutions in terms of $X_{m}$ exceptional
orthogonal polynomials. We further show that as the parameter $\lambda
\rightarrow 0$ or $-1$, we get the corresponding rationally extended Pursey and
the rationally extended Abraham-Moses type of scalar potentials respectively,
which have one bound state less than the starting scalar potentials.


Category: hep-th
Title: A Stringy Effect on Hawking Radiation
Authors: Pei-Ming Ho, Yosuke Imamura, Hikaru Kawai, Wei-Hsiang Shao
Date: 2023-09-22T15:24:26Z
Abstract:   In string theories, interactions are exponentially suppressed for
trans-Planckian space-like external momenta. We study a class of quantum field
theories that exhibit this feature modeled after Witten's bosonic open string
field theory, and discover a Lorentz-invariant UV/IR relation that leads to the
spacetime uncertainty principle proposed by Yoneya. Application to a dynamical
black hole background suggests that Hawking radiation is turned off around the
scrambling time.


Category: hep-th
Title: Coulomb and Higgs Phases of $G_2$-manifolds
Authors: Bobby Samir Acharya, Daniel Andrew Baldwin
Date: 2023-09-22T13:46:46Z
Abstract:   Ricci flat manifolds of special holonomy are a rich framework as models of
the extra dimensions in string/$M$-theory. At special points in vacuum moduli
space, special kinds of singularities occur and demand a physical
interpretation. In this paper we show that the topologically distinct
$G_2$-holonomy manifolds arising from desingularisations of codimension four
orbifold singularities due to Joyce and Karigiannis correspond physically to
Coulomb and Higgs phases of four dimensional gauge theories. The results
suggest generalisations of the Joyce-Karigiannis construction to arbitrary
ADE-singularities and higher order twists which we explore in detail in
explicitly solvable local models. These models allow us to derive an
isomorphism between moduli spaces of Ricci flat metrics on these non-compact
$G_2$-manifolds and flat ADE-connections on compact flat 3-manifolds which we
establish explicitly for $\operatorname{SU}(n)$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Generalized Second Law for Non-minimally Coupled Matter Theories
Authors: Prateksh Dhivakar, Krishna Jalan
Date: 2023-09-22T10:48:32Z
Abstract:   We prove the generalized second law (GSL) for higher curvature gravity
theories when the matter sector is non-minimally coupled. The validity of our
proof is in the regime of linearized fluctuations about equilibrium black
holes, which is the same regime as considered in the previous proofs by Wall
and Sarkar. These proofs were provided in different gravity theories - for
instance, Lovelock theory and higher curvature gravity - but the matter sector
was always taken to be minimally coupled. In this article, we describe how to
generalize the proof of linearized semi-classical GSL when the matter sector
comes with non-minimal couplings. The proof proceeds by suitably evaluating the
matter path integral in the stress tensor expectation value by treating the
higher derivative couplings in an effective field theory setting. We use the
recently established result of the linearized second law for such theories.


Category: hep-th
Title: Feynman integrals in two dimensions and single-valued hypergeometric
  functions
Authors: Claude Duhr, Franziska Porkert
Date: 2023-09-22T10:25:59Z
Abstract:   We show that all Feynman integrals in two Euclidean dimensions with massless
propagators and arbitrary non-integer propagator powers can be expressed in
terms of single-valued analogues of Aomoto-Gelfand hypergeometric functions.
The latter can themselves be written as bilinears of hypergeometric functions,
with coefficients that are intersection numbers in a twisted homology group. As
an application, we show that all one-loop integrals in two dimensions with
massless propagators can be written in terms of Lauricella $F_D^{(r)}$
functions, while the $L$-loop ladder integrals are related to the generalised
hypergeometric ${}_{L+1}F_L$ functions.


Category: hep-th
Title: Complex crystallographic reflection groups and Seiberg-Witten integrable
  systems: rank 1 case
Authors: Philip C. Argyres, Oleg Chalykh, Yongchao Lü
Date: 2023-09-22T10:03:45Z
Abstract:   We consider generalisations of the elliptic Calogero--Moser systems
associated to complex crystallographic groups in accordance to
\cite{EFMV11ecm}. In our previous work \cite{Argyres:2021iws}, we proposed
these systems as candidates for Seiberg--Witten integrable systems of certain
SCFTs. Here we examine that proposal for complex crystallographic groups of
rank one. Geometrically, this means considering elliptic curves $T^2$ with
$\Z_m$-symmetries, $m=2,3,4,6$, and Poisson deformations of the orbifolds
$(T^2\times\mathbb{C})/\Z_m$. The $m=2$ case was studied in
\cite{Argyres:2021iws}, while $m=3,4,6$ correspond to Seiberg--Witten
integrable systems for the rank 1 Minahan--Nemeshansky SCFTs of type
$E_{6,7,8}$. This allows us to describe the corresponding elliptic fibrations
and the Seiberg--Witten differential in a compact elegant form. This approach
also produces quantum spectral curves for these SCFTs, which are given by
Fuchsian ODEs with special properties.


Category: hep-th
Title: Tackling Feynman integrals with quantum minimization algorithms
Authors: German F. R. Sborlini
Date: 2023-09-22T09:41:09Z
Abstract:   One of the most severe bottlenecks to reach high-precision predictions in QFT
is the calculation of multiloop multileg Feynman integrals. Several new
strategies have been proposed in the last years, allowing impressive results
with deep implications in particle physics. Still, the efficiency of such
techniques starts to drastically decrease when including many loops and legs.
In this talk, we explore the implementation of quantum algorithms to optimize
the integrands of scattering amplitudes. We rely on the manifestly causal
loop-tree duality, which translates the loop into phase-space integrals and
avoids the spurious singularities due to non-causal effects. Then, we built a
Hamiltonian codifying causal-compatible contributions and minimize it using a
Variational Quantum Eigensolver. Our very promising results point towards a
potential speed-up for achieving a more numerically-stable representation of
Feynman integrals by using quantum computers.


Category: hep-th
Title: Center-symmetric Landau gauge: Further signatures of confinement
Authors: Duifje Maria van Egmond, Urko Reinosa
Date: 2023-09-22T08:14:46Z
Abstract:   In a recent article [1], we have identified new signatures for the Yang-Mills
deconfinement transition, based on the finite-temperature longitudinal or
(chromo-)electric gluon propagator as computed in the center-symmetric Landau
gauge. Here, we generalize these considerations into a systematic study of the
center symmetry identities obeyed by the correlation functions in this gauge.
Any violation of these constraints signals the breaking of center symmetry and
can thus serve as a probe for the deconfinement transition.


Category: hep-th
Title: Quantization of Length in Spaces with Position-Dependent
  Noncommutativity
Authors: Jishnu Aryampilly, Muthukumar Balasundaram, Aamir Rashid
Date: 2023-09-22T07:09:20Z
Abstract:   We present a novel approach to quantizing the length in noncommutative spaces
with positional-dependent noncommutativity. The method involves constructing
ladder operators that change the length not only along a plane but also along
the third direction due to a noncommutative parameter that is a combination of
canonical/Weyl-Moyal type and Lie algebraic type. The primary quantization of
length in canonical-type noncommutative space takes place only on a plane,
while in the present case, it happens in all three directions. We establish an
operator algebra that allows for the raising or lowering of eigenvalues of the
operator corresponding to the square of the length. We also attempt to
determine how the obtained ladder operators act on different states and work
out the eigenvalues of the square of the length operator in terms of
eigenvalues corresponding to the ladder operators. We conclude by discussing
the results obtained.


Category: hep-th
Title: Dirac fermions on wires confined to the graphene Moebius strip
Authors: L. N. Monteiro, J. E. G. Silva, C. A. S. Almeida
Date: 2023-09-22T03:53:45Z
Abstract:   We investigate the effects of the curved geometry on a massless relativistic
electron constrained to a graphene strip with a Moebius strip shape. The
anisotropic and parity-violating geometry of the Moebius band produces a
geometric potential that inherits these features. By considering wires along
the strip width and the strip length, we find exact solutions for the Dirac
equation and the effects of the geometric potential on the electron were
explored. In both cases, the geometric potential yields to a geometric phase on
the wave function. Along the strip width, the density of states depends on the
direction chosen for the wire, a consequence of the lack of axial symmetry.
Moreover, the breaking of the parity symmetry enables the electronic states to
be concentrated on the inner or on the outer portion of the strip. For wires
along the strip length, the nontrivial topology influences the eigenfunctions
by modifying their periodicity. It turns out that the ground state has a period
of $4\pi$ whereas the first excited state is a $2\pi$ periodic function.
Moreover, we found that the energy levels are half-integer multiples of the
energy of the ground state.


Category: hep-th
Title: Chaotic motion of scalar particle coupling to Chern-Simons invariant in
  the stationary axisymmetric Einstein-Maxwell dilaton black hole spacetime
Authors: Lina Zhang, Songbai Chen, Qiyuan Pan, Jiliang Jing
Date: 2023-09-22T03:38:20Z
Abstract:   We investigate the motion of a test scalar particle coupling to the
Chern-Simons (CS) invariant in the background of a stationary axisymmetric
black hole in the Einstein-Maxwell-Dilaton-Axion (EMDA) gravity. Comparing with
the case of a Kerr black hole, we observe that the presence of the dilation
parameter makes the CS invariant more complex, and changes the range of the
coupling parameter and the spin parameter where the chaotic motion appears for
the scalar particle. Moreover, we find that the coupling parameter together
with the spin parameter also affects the range of the dilation parameter where
the chaos occurs. We also probe the effects of the dilation parameter on the
chaotic strength of the chaotic orbits for the coupled particle. Our results
indicate that the coupling between the CS invariant and the scalar particle
yields the richer dynamical behavior of the particle in the rotating EMDA black
hole spacetime.


Category: hep-th
Title: Balance Laws as Test of Gravitational Waveforms
Authors: Lavinia Heisenberg
Date: 2023-09-21T22:05:07Z
Abstract:   Gravitational waveforms play a crucial role in comparing observed signals to
theoretical predictions. However, obtaining accurate analytical waveforms
directly from general relativity remains challenging. Existing methods involve
a complex blend of post-Newtonian theory, effective-one-body formalism,
numerical relativity, and interpolation, introducing systematic errors. As
gravitational wave astronomy advances with new detectors, these errors gain
significance, particularly when testing general relativity in the non-linear
regime. A recent development proposes a novel approach to address this issue.
By deriving precise constraints - or balance laws - directly from full
non-linear GR, this method offers a means to evaluate waveform quality, detect
template weaknesses, and ensure internal consistency. Before delving into the
intricacies of balance laws in full non-linear general relativity, we
illustrate the concept using a detailed mechanical analogy. We'll examine a
dissipative mechanical system as an example, demonstrating how mechanical
balance laws can gauge the accuracy of approximate solutions in capturing the
complete physical scenario. While mechanical balance laws are straightforward,
deriving balance laws in electromagnetism and general relativity demands a
rigorous foundation rooted in mathematically precise concepts of radiation.
Following the analogy with electromagnetism, we derive balance laws in general
relativity. As a proof of concept, we employ an analytical approximate waveform
model, showcasing how these balance laws serve as a litmus test for the model's
validity.


Category: hep-th
Title: Emergence of fractal cosmic space from fractional quantum gravity
Authors: P. F. da Silva Junior, E. W. de Oliveira Costa, S. Jalalzadeh
Date: 2023-09-21T20:49:56Z
Abstract:   Based on Padmanabhan's theory, the spatial expansion of the Universe can be
explained by the emergence of space as cosmic time progresses. To further
explore this idea, we have developed fractional-fractal Friedmann and
Raychaudhuri equations for an isotropic and homogeneous universe. Our analysis
has also delved into how Padmanabhan's concept fits into the framework of
fractional quantum gravity. Our research shows that a fractal horizon model
strongly supports the validity of the emerging Universe paradigm and its
connection to horizon thermodynamics. This study indicates early how the
emergent gravity perspective might manifest in quantum gravity. By utilizing
the fractional-fractal Friedmann and Raychaudhuri equations, we have
established that the mainstream cosmology model can be justified without a dark
matter component. As a result, the standard $\Lambda$CDM model has been reduced
to $\Lambda$-Cold Baryonic Matter, which has significant implications for our
understanding of the Universe.


Category: hep-th
Title: Crossing singularities in the saddle point approximation
Authors: Job Feldbrugge, Dylan L. Jow, Ue-Li Pen
Date: 2023-09-21T18:50:12Z
Abstract:   We describe a new phenomenon in the study of the real-time path integral,
where complex classical paths hit singularities of the potential and need to be
analytically continued beyond the space for which they solve the boundary value
problem. We show that the behavior is universal and central to the problem of
quantum tunneling. These analytically continued complex classical paths enrich
the study of real-time Feynman path integrals.


Category: hep-th
Title: Complex classical paths in quantum reflections and tunneling
Authors: Job Feldbrugge, Dylan L. Jow, Ue-Li Pen
Date: 2023-09-21T18:43:24Z
Abstract:   The real-time propagator of the symmetric Rosen-Morse, also known as the
symmetric modified P\"oschl-Teller, barrier is expressed in the
Picard-Lefschetz path integral formalism using real and complex classical
paths. We explain how the interference pattern in the real-time propagator and
energy propagator is organized by caustics and Stoke's phenomena, and list the
relevant real and complex classical paths as a function of the initial and
final position. We discover the occurrence of singularity crossings, where the
analytic continuation of the complex classical path no longer satisfies the
boundary value problem and needs to be analytically continued. Moreover, we
demonstrate how these singularity crossings play a central role in the
real-time description of quantum tunneling.


Category: hep-th
Title: Bootstrapping gauge theories
Authors: Yifei He, Martin Kruczenski
Date: 2023-09-21T18:04:33Z
Abstract:   We consider asymptotically free gauge theories with gauge group $SU(N_c)$ and
$N_f$ quarks with mass $m_q\ll \Lambda_{\text{QCD}}$ that undergo chiral
symmetry breaking and confinement. We propose a bootstrap method to compute the
S-matrix of the pseudo-Goldstone bosons (pions) that dominate the low energy
physics. For the important case of $N_c=3$, $N_f=2$, a numerical implementation
of the method gives the phase shifts of the $S0$, $P1$ and $S2$ waves in good
agreement with experimental results. The method incorporates gauge theory
information ($N_c$, $N_f$, $m_q$, $\Lambda_{\text{QCD}}$) by using the
form-factor bootstrap recently proposed by Karateev, Kuhn and Penedones
together with a finite energy version of the SVZ sum rules. This requires, in
addition, the values of the quark and gluon condensates. At low energy we
impose constraints from chiral symmetry breaking which additionally require
knowing the pion mass $m_\pi$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Characterization and classification of interacting (2+1)D topological
  crystalline insulators with orientation-preserving wallpaper groups
Authors: Naren Manjunath, Vladimir Calvera, Maissam Barkeshli
Date: 2023-09-21T18:00:01Z
Abstract:   While free fermion topological crystalline insulators have been largely
classified, the analogous problem in the strongly interacting case has been
only partially solved. In this paper, we develop a characterization and
classification of interacting, invertible fermionic topological phases in (2+1)
dimensions with charge conservation, discrete magnetic translation and $M$-fold
point group rotation symmetries, which form the group $G_f = \text{U}(1)^f
\times_{\phi} [\mathbb{Z}^2\rtimes \mathbb{Z}_M]$ for $M=1,2,3,4,6$. $\phi$ is
the magnetic flux per unit cell. We derive a topological response theory in
terms of background crystalline gauge fields, which gives a complete
classification of different phases and a physical characterization in terms of
quantized response to symmetry defects. We then derive the same classification
in terms of a set of real space invariants $\{\Theta_{\text{o}}^\pm\}$ that can
be obtained from ground state expectation values of suitable partial rotation
operators. We explicitly relate these real space invariants to the quantized
coefficients in the topological response theory, and find the dependence of the
invariants on the chiral central charge $c_-$ of the invertible phase. Finally,
when $\phi = 0$ we derive an explicit map between the free and interacting
classifications.


Category: hep-th
Title: Grand canonical ensemble of a $d$-dimensional Reissner-Nordström black
  hole in a cavity
Authors: Tiago V. Fernandes, José P. S. Lemos
Date: 2023-09-21T18:00:00Z
Abstract:   The grand canonical ensemble of a $d$-dimensional Reissner-Nordstr\"om black
hole space in a cavity is analyzed. The realization of this ensemble is made
through the Euclidean path integral approach by giving the Euclidean action for
the black hole with the correct topology, and boundary conditions corresponding
to a cavity, where the fixed quantities are the temperature and the electric
potential. One performs a zero loop approximation to find and analyze the
stationary points of the reduced action. This yields two solutions for the
electrically charged black hole, $r_{+1}$, which is the smaller and unstable,
and $r_{+2}$, which is the larger and stable. One also analyzes the most
probable configurations, which are either a stable charged black hole or hot
flat space, mimicked by a nongravitating charged shell. Making the
correspondence between the action and the grand potential, one can get the
black hole thermodynamic quantities, such as the entropy, the mean charge, the
mean energy, and the thermodynamic pressure, as well as the Smarr formula,
shown to be valid only for the unstable black hole. We find that thermodynamic
stability is related to the positivity of the heat capacity at constant
electric potential and area of the cavity. We also comment on the most
favorable thermodynamic phases and phase transitions. We then choose $d = 5$,
which is singled out naturally from the other higher dimensions as it provides
an exact solution for the problem, and apply all the results previously found.
The case $d = 4$ is mentioned. We compare thermodynamic radii with the photonic
orbit radius and the Buchdahl-Andr\'easson-Wright bound radius in
$d$-dimensional Reissner-Nordstr\"om spacetimes and find they are unconnected,
showing that the connections displayed in the Schwarzschild case are not
generic, rather they are very restricted holding only in the pure gravitational
situation.


Category: hep-th
Title: Gravitational Wave non-Gaussianity from trans-Planckian Quantum Noise
Authors: Mattia Cielo, Matteo Fasiello, Gianpiero Mangano, Ofelia Pisanti
Date: 2023-09-21T17:45:54Z
Abstract:   We examine the effect of a trans-Planckian phase on the dynamics of
inflationary tensor perturbations. To remedy the fact that this regime is not
fully captured by standard perturbation theory, we introduce an effective
quantum noise source, whose role is regulated by the energy scale $\Lambda$.
The presence of the source modifies the initial conditions for the tensor
modes, leaving a distinct imprint. We study the amplitude and shape of the
gravitational wave bispectrum of the model and compare these with their
counterparts obtained under the assumptions of Bunch-Davies initial conditions
and $\alpha$-vacua states. Depending on the value of the scale $\Lambda$, we
find distinctive signatures associated with both the bispectrum shape and the
non-linear parameter $f_{\rm NL}$.


Category: hep-th
Title: A generalization of the Witten conjecture through spectral curve
Authors: Shuai Guo, Ce Ji, Qingsheng Zhang
Date: 2023-09-21T17:24:42Z
Abstract:   We propose a generalization of the Witten conjecture, which connects a
descendent enumerative theory with a specific reduction of KP integrable
hierarchy. Our conjecture is realized by two parts: Part I (Geometry)
establishes a correspondence between the descendent potential function (apart
from ancestors) and the topological recursion of specific spectral curve data
$(\Sigma, x,y,B)$; Part II (Integrability) claims that the TR descendent
potential, defined at the boundary points of the spectral curve (where $dx$ has
poles), is a tau function of a certain reduction of the multi-component KP
hierarchy.
  In this paper, we show the geometry part for any formal descendent theory by
using a generalized Laplace transform, and show the integrability part for the
one-boundary cases. As applications, we generalize and prove the $r$KdV
integrability of negative $r$-spin theory conjectured by Chidambaram,
Garcia-Falide and Giacchetto [6], and prove the KdV integrability for the
theory associated with the Weierstrass curve introduced by Dubrovin.


Category: hep-th
Title: An improved algorithm for dynamical triangulations and simulations of
  finer lattices
Authors: Mingwei Dai, Walter Freeman, Jack Laiho, Marc Schiffer, Judah Unmuth-Yockey
Date: 2023-09-21T17:02:37Z
Abstract:   We introduce a new algorithm for the simulation of Euclidean dynamical
triangulations that mimics the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, but where all
proposed moves are accepted. This rejection-free algorithm allows for the
factorization of local and global terms in the action, a condition needed for
efficient simulation of theories with global terms, while still maintaining
detailed balance. We test our algorithm on the $2d$ Ising model, and against
results for EDT obtained with standard Metropolis. Our new algorithm allows us
to simulate EDT at finer lattice spacings than previously possible, and we find
geometries that resemble semiclassical Euclidean de Sitter space in agreement
with earlier results at coarser lattices. The agreement between lattice data
and the classical de Sitter solution continues to get better as the lattice
spacing decreases.


Category: hep-th
Title: Exact black hole solutions in higher-order scalar-tensor theories
Authors: Eugeny Babichev, Christos Charmousis, Nicolas Lecoeur
Date: 2023-09-21T16:23:42Z
Abstract:   In this chapter, we discuss explicit black hole solutions in higher-order
scalar-tensor theories. After a brief recap of no-hair theorems, we start our
discussion by so-called stealth solutions present in theories with parity and
shift symmetry. Stealth solutions are such that their metric are Ricci flat
General Relativity solutions, but they are accompanied by a non-trivial scalar
field, in both spherically-symmetric and rotating cases. The stealth metrics
then enable to construct an analytic stationary solution of scalar-tensor
theory which is called disformed Kerr metric. This solution constitutes a
measurable departure from the usual Kerr geometry of GR. We discuss within
parity and shift symmetric theories several non-stealth solutions. We then
consider scalar-tensor theories stemming from a Kaluza-Klein reduction of a
higher-dimensional Lovelock theory. These theories encompass all Horndeski
functionals and hence go beyond parity and shift symmetry. Reduction and
singular limits allow one to obtain non-stealth black holes with differing
interesting properties which are not Ricci flat metrics. We analyse the
solutions obtained and classify them with respect to the geometry of the
internal space according to their Kaluza-Klein origin.


Category: hep-th
Title: Refined instanton analysis of the 2D $\mathbb{C}P^{N-1}$ model: mass
  gap, theta dependence, and mirror symmetry
Authors: Mendel Nguyen, Mithat Ünsal
Date: 2023-09-21T15:39:10Z
Abstract:   We address nonperturbative dynamics of the two-dimensional bosonic and
supersymmetric $\mathbb{C}P^{N-1}$ models for general $N$ by developing new
tools directly on $\mathbb{R}^2$. The analysis starts with a new formulation of
instantons that is consistent with the existence of the classical moduli space,
classical dipole--dipole type interactions of instanton--anti-instanton pairs,
and vanishing interaction of instanton--instanton pairs. The classical
consistency is achieved via a representation of the instanton as a collection
of $N$ pointlike constituents carrying pair of real and imaginary charges
valued in the weight lattice of $SU(N)$. The constituents interact via a
generalized Coulomb interaction and do not violate the fact that instanton is a
single lump with integer topological charge. By developing the appropriate
Gibbs distribution, we show that the vacuum can be captured by a statistical
field theory of these constituents, and their cluster expansion. Contrary to
the common belief that instantons do not capture the vacuum structure and
non-perturbation properties of such theories, our refined analysis is able to
produce properties such as mass gap, theta dependence, and confinement of the
theory on $\mathbb{R}^2$. In supersymmetric theory, our construction gives a
new derivation of the mirror symmetry between the sigma model and the dual
Landau--Ginzburg model by Hori and Vafa. Our construction also demonstrates
that there is absolutely no conflict between large $N$ and instantons.


Category: hep-th
Title: KP integrability through the $x-y$ swap relation
Authors: Alexander Alexandrov, Boris Bychkov, Petr Dunin-Barkowski, Maxim Kazarian, Sergey Shadrin
Date: 2023-09-21T15:36:04Z
Abstract:   We discuss a universal relation that we call the $x-y$ swap relation, which
plays a prominent role in the theory of topological recursion, Hurwitz theory,
and free probability theory. We describe in a very precise and detailed way the
interaction of the $x-y$ swap relation and KP integrability. As an application,
we prove a recent conjecture that relates some particular instances of
topological recursion to the Mironov-Morozov-Semenoff matrix integrals.


Category: hep-th
Title: Band Flattening and Overlap Fermion
Authors: Taro Kimura, Masataka Watanabe
Date: 2023-09-21T15:33:03Z
Abstract:   We show that, for each symmetry class based on the tenfold way
classification, the effective Dirac operator obtained by integrating out the
additional bulk direction takes a value in the corresponding classifying space,
from which we obtain the flat band Hamiltonian. We then obtain the overlap
Dirac operator for each symmetry class and establish the Ginsparg--Wilson
relation associated with $\mathcal{C}$ and $\mathcal{T}$ symmetries, and also
the mod-two index theorem.


Category: hep-th
Title: Categorical Pentagon Relations and Koszul Duality
Authors: Davide Gaiotto, Ahsan Khan
Date: 2023-09-21T14:19:56Z
Abstract:   The Kontsevich-Soibelman wall-crossing formula is known to control the
jumping behavior of BPS state counting indices in four-dimensional theories
with $\mathcal{N}=2$ supersymmetry. The formula can take two equivalent forms:
a ``fermionic'' form with nice positivity properties and a ``bosonic'' form
with a clear physical interpretation. In an important class of examples, the
fermionic form of the formula has a mathematical categorification involving PBW
bases for a Cohomological Hall Algebra. The bosonic form lacks an analogous
categorification. We construct an equivalence of chain complexes which
categorifies the simplest example of the bosonic wall-crossing formula: the
bosonic pentagon identity for the quantum dilogarithm. The chain complexes can
be promoted to differential graded algebras which we relate to the PBW bases of
the relevant CoHA by a certain quadratic duality. The equivalence of complexes
then follows from the relation between quadratic duality and Koszul duality. We
argue that this is a special case of a general phenomenon: the bosonic
wall-crossing formulae are categorified to equivalences of $A_\infty$ algebras
which are quadratic dual to PBW presentations of algebras which underlie the
fermionic wall-crossing formulae. We give a partial interpretation of our
differential graded algebras in terms of a holomorphic-topological version of
BPS webs.


Category: hep-th
Title: Scotoelectroweak theory
Authors: Phung Van Dong, Duong Van Loi
Date: 2023-09-21T14:03:04Z
Abstract:   We argue that the higher weak isospin $SU(3)_L$ manifestly unifies dark
matter and normal matter in its isomultiplets for which dark matter carries a
conserved dark charge while normal matter does not. The resultant gauge
symmetry is given by $SU(3)_C\otimes SU(3)_L \otimes U(1)_X\otimes U(1)_G$,
where the first factor is the color group, while the rest defines a theory of
scotoelectroweak in which $X$ and $G$ determine electric charge
$Q=T_3-1/\sqrt{3}T_8+X$ and dark charge $D=-2/\sqrt{3}T_3+G$. This setup
provides both appropriate scotogenic neutrino masses and dark matter stability
as preserved by a residual dark parity $P_D=(-1)^D$. Interpretation of the dark
charge is further discussed, given that $SU(3)_L$ is broken at very high energy
scale.


Category: hep-th
Title: Scalaron dynamics from UV to IR
Authors: Philippe Brax, Pierre Vanhove
Date: 2023-09-21T13:58:03Z
Abstract:   We consider a scenario where the scalaron of $f({\cal R})$ models is related
to the volume modulus of string compactifications leaving only one scalar
degree of freedom at low energy. The coefficient of the leading curvature
squared contribution to the low energy effective action of gravity determines
the mass of the scalaron. We impose that this mass is small enough to allow for
the scalaron to drive Starobinski's inflation. After inflation, the
renormalisation group evolution of the couplings of the $f({\cal R})$ theory,
viewed as a scalar-tensor theory, provides the link with the Infra-Red regime.
We consider a scenario where the corrections to the mass of the scalaron are
large and reduce it below the electron mass in the Infra-Red, so that the
scalaron plays a central role in the low energy dynamics of the Universe. In
particular this leads to a connection between the scalaron mass and the
measured vacuum energy provided its renormalisation group running at energies
higher than the electron mass never drops below the present day value of the
dark energy.


Category: hep-th
Title: Persistent current-carrying state of charge quasuparticles in
  $np$-ribbon featuring single Dirac cone
Authors: Anatoly M. Kadigrobov, Ilya M. Eremin
Date: 2023-09-21T13:56:34Z
Abstract:   The formation of persistent charge currents in mesoscopic systems remains an
interesting and actual topic of condensed matter research. Here, we analyze the
formation of spontaneous arising persistent currents of charged fermions in
2-dimensional electron-hole ribbons on the top and bottom of a 3-dimensional
topological insulator. In such a device the two-dimensional Dirac fermions with
opposite chiralities are spatially separated that allows these currents to flow
in the opposite directions without compensating each other. The nature of this
phenomenon is based on the interference of the quasiparticle quantum waves
which are scattered with asymmetric scattering phases at the lateral n-p chiral
junction and then reflected back by the external boundaries of the ribbon. As a
result quasiparticles in the ribbon are shown to be in unified electron-hole
quantum states carrying the persistent current.


Category: hep-th
Title: Varying fundamental constants meet Hubble
Authors: Jens Chluba, Luke Hart
Date: 2023-09-21T13:54:48Z
Abstract:   Fundamental physical constants need not be constant, neither spatially nor
temporally. -- This seeming simple statement has profound implications for a
wide range of physical processes and interactions, and can be probed through a
number of observations. In this chapter, we highlight how CMB measurements can
constrain variations of the fine-structure constant and the electron rest mass
during the cosmological recombination era. The sensitivity of the CMB
anisotropies to these constants arises because they directly affect the cosmic
ionization history and Thomson scattering rate, with a number of subtle atomic
physics effects coming together. Recent studies have revealed that variations
of the electron rest mass can indeed alleviate the Hubble tension, as we
explain here. Future opportunities through measurements of the cosmological
recombination radiation are briefly mentioned, highlighting how these could
provide an exciting avenue towards uncovering the physical origin of the Hubble
tension experimentally.


Category: hep-th
Title: Pair Production in time-dependent Electric field at Finite times
Authors:  Deepak, Manoranjan P. Singh
Date: 2023-09-21T13:49:43Z
Abstract:   We investigate the finite-time behavior of pair production from the vacuum by
a time-dependent Sauter pulsed electric field using the spinor quantum
electrodynamics (QED). In the adiabatic basis, the one-particle distribution
function in momentum space is determined by utilizing the exact analytical
solution of the Dirac equation. By examining the temporal behavior of the
one-particle distribution function and the momentum spectrum of created pairs
in the sub-critical field limit $(E_0 = 0.2E_c)$, we observe oscillatory
patterns in the longitudinal momentum spectrum(LMS) of particles at finite
times. These oscillations arise due to quantum interference effects resulting
from the dynamical tunneling. Furthermore, we derive an approximate and
simplified analytical expression for the distribution function at finite times,
which allows us to explain the origin and behavior of these oscillations.
Additionally, we discuss the role of the vacuum polarization function and its
counter term to the oscillations in LMS vacuum excitation. We also analyse the
transverse momentum spectrum (TMS).


Category: hep-th
Title: Non-perturbative real topological strings
Authors: Marcos Marino, Maximilian Schwick
Date: 2023-09-21T13:15:52Z
Abstract:   We study the resurgent structure of Walcher's real topological string on
general Calabi--Yau manifolds. We find all-orders trans-series solutions to the
corresponding holomorphic anomaly equations, by extending the operator
formalism of the closed topological string, and we obtain explicit formulae for
multi-instanton amplitudes. We find that the integer invariants counting disks
appear as Stokes constants in the resurgent structure, and we provide
experimental evidence for our results in the case of the real topological
string on local $\mathbb P^2$.


Category: hep-th
Title: Conformal Yang-Mills field in arbitrary dimensions
Authors: R. R. Metsaev
Date: 2023-09-21T13:06:56Z
Abstract:   By using ordinary-derivative (second-derivative) approach, conformal
Yang-Mills field in the flat space space of even dimension greater than or
equal to six is studied. In the framework of ordinary approach, the field
content, in addition to generic Yang-Mills field, consists of auxiliary vector
fields and Stueckelberg scalar fields. For such field content, we obtain a
gauge invariant Lagrangian with conventional second-derivative kinetic terms
and the corresponding gauge transformations. The Lagrangian is built in terms
of non-abelian field strengths. Structure of the gauge algebra entering gauge
symmetries of the conformal Yang-Mills field is described. FFF-vertex of the
conformal Yang-Mills field which involves three derivatives is also obtained.
For six, eight, and ten dimensions, eliminating the auxiliary vector fields and
gauging away the Stueckelberg scalar fields, we obtain higher-derivative
Lagrangian of the conformal Yang-Mills field.


Category: hep-th
Title: Wormhole solution free of ghosts in Einstein's gravity with two scalar
  fields
Authors: Shin'ichi Nojiri, G. G. L. Nashed
Date: 2023-09-21T12:40:35Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we construct models that admit the traversable wormhole
geometries in the framework of Einstein's gravity with two scalar fields. As
well known, the energy conditions are broken and we show that there appears a
ghost. The ghost can be, however, eliminated by imposing a constraint on the
ghost field, which is a scalar. The constraint is similar to the mimetic one
proposed by Chamseddine and Mukhanov to construct an alternative description of
cold dark matter. We explicitly show that there does not appear any unstable
mode although the energy conditions are broken. Therefore we obtain a model
that realizes the traversable and stable wormhole.


Category: hep-th
Title: More Fermionic Supersymmetric Wilson loops in Four Dimensions
Authors: Hao Ouyang, Jun-Bao Wu
Date: 2023-09-21T12:39:21Z
Abstract:   We construct supersymmetric fermionic Wilson loops along general curves in
four-dimensional $\mathcal{N}=4$ super Yang-Mills theory and along general
planar curves in $\mathcal{N}=2$ superconformal $SU(N)\times SU(N)$ quiver
theory. These loops are generalizations of the Zarembo loops and are
cohomologically equivalent to them. In $\mathcal{N}=4$ super Yang-Mills theory,
we compute their expectation values and verify the cohomological equivalence
relation up to the order $g^4$ in perturbation theory.


Category: hep-th
Title: Entanglement Rényi entropy and boson-fermion duality in massless
  Thirring model
Authors: Harunobu Fujimura, Tatsuma Nishioka, Soichiro Shimamori
Date: 2023-09-21T08:46:34Z
Abstract:   We investigate the second R\'enyi entropy of two intervals in the massless
Thirring model describing a self-interacting Dirac fermion in two dimensions.
Boson-fermion duality relating this model to a free compact boson theory
enables us to simplify the calculation of the second R\'enyi entropy, reducing
it to the evaluation of the partition functions of the bosonic theory on a
torus. We derive exact results on the second R\'enyi entropy, and examine the
dependence on the sizes of the intervals and the coupling constant of the model
both analytically and numerically. We also explore the mutual R\'enyi
information, a measure quantifying the correlation between the two intervals,
and find that it generally increases as the coupling constant of the Thirring
model becomes larger.


Category: hep-th
Title: Asymptotic Spinspacetime
Authors: Joon-Hwi Kim
Date: 2023-09-21T08:39:54Z
Abstract:   We show that Poincar\'e invariance directly implies the existence of a
complexified Minkowski space whose real and imaginary directions unify
spacetime and spin, which we dub spinspacetime. Remarkably, despite the
intrinsic noncommutativity of spin, this framework describes mutually commuting
holomorphic or anti-holomorphic coordinates, which trace back to the complex
geometry of twistor space. As a physical implication, we show that the
Newman-Janis shift property of spinning black holes can be derived from a
complexified version of equivalence principle. The fact that the exponential
spin factors of their scattering amplitudes simply arise from half-Fourier
transforms suggests that classically spinning massive states are realized in
massive twistor coherent states.


Category: hep-th
Title: Separability transitions in topological states induced by local
  decoherence
Authors: Yu-Hsueh Chen, Tarun Grover
Date: 2023-09-21T08:28:17Z
Abstract:   We study states with intrinsic topological order subjected to local
decoherence from the perspective of separability, i.e., whether a decohered
mixed state can be expressed as an ensemble of short-range entangled pure
states. We focus on toric codes and the X-cube fracton state and provide
evidence for the existence of decoherence-induced separability transitions that
precisely coincide with the error-recovery transitions. A key insight is that
local decoherence acting on the 'parent' cluster states of these models results
in a Gibbs state.


Category: hep-th
Title: Large $N$ and large representations of Schur line defect correlators
Authors: Yasuyuki Hatsuda, Tadashi Okazaki
Date: 2023-09-21T01:32:28Z
Abstract:   We study the large $N$ and large representation limits of the Schur line
defect correlators of the Wilson line operators transforming in the
(anti)symmetric, hook and rectangular representations for $\mathcal{N}=4$
$U(N)$ super Yang-Mills theory. By means of the factorization property, the
large $N$ correlators of the Wilson line operators in arbitrary representations
can be exactly calculated in principle. In the large representation limit they
turn out to be expressible in terms of certain infinite series such as
Ramanujan's general theta functions and the $q$-analogues of multiple zeta
values ($q$-MZVs). Several generating functions for combinatorial objects,
including partitions with non-negative cranks and conjugacy classes of general
linear groups over finite fields, emerge from the large $N$ correlators. Also
we find conjectured properties of the automorphy and the hook-length expansion
satisfied by the large $N$ correlators.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Bremsstrahlung emission from nuclear reactions in compact stars
Authors: Sergei P. Maydanyuk, Kostiantyn A. Shaulskyi
Date: 2019-12-27T13:35:35Z
Abstract:   Bremsstrahlung emission of photons during nuclear reactions inside dense
stellar medium is investigated in the paper. For that, a new model of nucleus
is developed, where nuclear forces combine nucleons as bound system in
dependence on deep location inside compact star. A polytropic model of stars at
index $n=3$ with densities characterized from white dwarf to neutron star is
used. Bremsstrahlung formalism and calculations are well tested on existed
experimental information for scattering of protons of light nuclei in Earth. We
find the following. (1) In neutron stars a phenomenon of dissociation of
nucleus is observed --- its disintegration on individual nucleons, starting
from some critical distance between this nucleus and center of star with high
density. We do not observe such a phenomenon in white dwarfs. (2) In the white
dwarfs, influence of stellar medium imperceptibly affects on bremsstrahlung
photons. Also, we have accurate description of bremsstrahlung photons in
nuclear reactions in Sun. (3) For neutron stars, influence of stellar medium is
essentially more intensive and it crucially changes the bremsstrahlung
spectrum. The most intensive emission is from bowel of the star, while the
weakest emission is from periphery.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Towards a warped inflationary brane scanning
Authors: Heng-Yu Chen, Jinn-Ouk Gong
Date: 2008-12-30T20:59:03Z
Abstract:   We present a detailed systematics for comparing warped brane inflation with
the observations, incorporating the effects of both moduli stabilization and
ultraviolet bulk physics. We explicitly construct an example of the inflaton
potential governing the motion of a mobile D3 brane in the entire warped
deformed conifold. This allows us to precisely identify the corresponding
scales of the cosmic microwave background. The effects due to bulk fluxes or
localized sources are parametrized using gauge/string duality. We next perform
some sample scannings to explore the parameter space of the complete potential,
and first demonstrate that without the bulk effects there can be large
degenerate sets of parameters with observationally consistent predictions. When
the bulk perturbations are included, however, the observational predictions are
generally spoiled. For them to remain consistent, the magnitudes of the bulk
effects need to be highly suppressed via fine tuning.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Ultraviolet Spectra of Local Galaxies and their Link with the High-z
  Population
Authors: Claus Leitherer
Date: 2008-12-30T20:38:39Z
Abstract:   The new generation of 8 to 10m class telescope is providing us with
high-quality spectral information on the rest-frame ultraviolet region of
star-forming galaxies at cosmological distances. The data can be used to
address questions such as, e.g., the star-formation histories, the stellar
initial mass function, the dust properties, and the energetics and chemistry of
the interstellar medium. We can tackle these issues from a different angle by
comparing the spectral properties of high-redshift galaxies to those of their
counterparts in the local universe. I give a review of recent developments
related to observations and empirical modeling of the ultraviolet spectra of
local galaxies with recent star formation. The emphasis is on the youngest
stellar populations with ages less than 100 Myr. Current uncertainties will be
discussed, and areas where progress is needed in the future are highlighted.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Correlated variability in the blazar 3C 454.3
Authors: E. W. Bonning, C. Bailyn, C. M. Urry, M. Buxton, G. Fossati, L. Maraschi, P. Coppi, R. Scalzo, J. Isler, A. Kaptur
Date: 2008-12-30T20:20:48Z
Abstract:   The blazar 3C 454.3 was revealed by the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope to be
in an exceptionally high flux state in July 2008. Accordingly, we performed a
multi-wavelength monitoring campaign on this blazar using IR and optical
observations from the SMARTS telescopes, optical, UV and X-ray data from the
Swift satellite, and public-release gamma-ray data from Fermi. We find an
excellent correlation between the IR, optical, UV and gamma-ray light curves,
with a time lag of less than one day. The amplitude of the infrared variability
is comparable to that in gamma-rays, and larger than at optical or UV
wavelengths. The X-ray flux is not strongly correlated with either the
gamma-rays or longer wavelength data. These variability characteristics find a
natural explanation in the external Compton model, in which electrons with
Lorentz factor gamma~10^(3-4) radiate synchrotron emission in the
infrared-optical and also scatter accretion disk or emission line photons to
gamma-ray energies, while much cooler electrons (gamma~10^(1-2)) produce X-rays
by scattering synchrotron or other ambient photons.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Biases and Uncertainties in Physical Parameter Estimates of Lyman Break
  Galaxies from Broad-band Photometry
Authors: Seong-Kook Lee, Rafal Idzi, Henry C. Ferguson, Rachel S. Somerville, Tommy Wiklind, Mauro Giavalisco
Date: 2008-12-30T20:20:43Z
Abstract:   We investigate the biases and uncertainties in estimates of physical
parameters of high-redshift Lyman break galaxies (LBGs), such as stellar mass,
mean stellar population age, and star formation rate (SFR), obtained from
broad-band photometry. By combining LCDM hierarchical structure formation
theory, semi-analytic treatments of baryonic physics, and stellar population
synthesis models, we construct model galaxy catalogs from which we select LBGs
at redshifts z ~ 3.4, 4.0, and 5.0. The broad-band spectral energy
distributions (SEDs) of these model LBGs are then analysed by fitting galaxy
template SEDs derived from stellar population synthesis models with smoothly
declining SFRs. We compare the statistical properties of LBGs' physical
parameters -- such as stellar mass, SFR, and stellar population age -- as
derived from the best-fit galaxy templates with the intrinsic values from the
semi-analytic model. We find some trends in these distributions: first, when
the redshift is known, SED-fitting methods reproduce the input distributions of
LBGs' stellar masses relatively well, with a minor tendency to underestimate
the masses overall, but with substantial scatter. Second, there are large
systematic biases in the distributions of best-fit SFRs and mean ages, in the
sense that single-component SED-fitting methods underestimate SFRs and
overestimate ages. We attribute these trends to the different star formation
histories predicted by the semi-analytic models and assumed in the galaxy
templates used in SED-fitting procedure, and to the fact that light from the
current generation of star-formation can hide older generations of stars. These
biases, which arise from the SED-fitting procedure, can significantly affect
inferences about galaxy evolution from broadband photometry.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Dynamics of a Spherical Accretion Shock with Neutrino Heating and
  Alpha-Particle Recombination
Authors: Rodrigo Fernández, Christopher Thompson
Date: 2008-12-30T20:13:32Z
Abstract:   We investigate the effects of neutrino heating and alpha-particle
recombination on the hydrodynamics of core-collapse supernovae. Our focus is on
the non-linear dynamics of the shock wave that forms in the collapse, and the
assembly of positive energy material below it. To this end, we perform
time-dependent hydrodynamic simulations with FLASH2.5 in spherical and axial
symmetry. These generalize our previous calculations by allowing for bulk
neutrino heating and for nuclear statistical equilibrium between n, p and
alpha. The heating rate is freely tunable, as is the starting radius of the
shock relative to the recombination radius of alpha-particles. An explosion in
spherical symmetry involves the excitation of an overstable mode, which may be
viewed as the L=0 version of the `Standing Accretion Shock Instability'. In 2D
simulations, non-spherical deformations of the shock are driven by plumes of
material with positive Bernoulli parameter, which are concentrated well outside
the zone of strong neutrino heating. The non-spherical modes of the shock reach
a large amplitude only when the heating rate is also high enough to excite
convection below the shock. The critical heating rate that causes an explosion
depends sensitively on the initial position of the shock relative to the
recombination radius. Weaker heating is required to drive an explosion in 2D
than in 1D, but the difference also depends on the size of the shock. Forcing
the infalling heavy nuclei to break up into n and p below the shock only causes
a slight increase in the critical heating rate, except when the shock starts
out at a large radius. This shows that heating by neutrinos (or some other
mechanism) must play a significant role in pushing the shock far enough out
that recombination heating takes over.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Asymptotically FRW black holes
Authors: J. T. Firouzjaee, Reza Mansouri
Date: 2008-12-30T19:58:20Z
Abstract:   Application of concepts like black hole and event horizon in cosmological
context are not trivial, as has been shown in the last decade. We introduce
special solutions of the LTB family representing collapsing over-dense regions
extending to an expanding closed, open, or flat FRW model asymptotically. We
study the dynamics of the collapsing region, and its density profile. The
question of the strength of the central singularity and its nakedness, as well
as the existence of an apparent horizon and an event horizon is dealt with in
detail. Differences to the Schwarzschild black hole are addressed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Quantum Black Holes As Elementary Particles
Authors: Yuan K. Ha
Date: 2008-12-30T19:20:51Z
Abstract:   Are black holes elementary particles? Are they fermions or bosons? We
investigate the remarkable possibility that quantum black holes are the
smallest and heaviest elementary particles. We are able to construct various
fundamental quantum black holes: the spin-0, spin 1/2, spin-1, and the
Planck-charge cases, using the results in general relativity. Quantum black
holes in the neighborhood of the Galaxy could resolve the paradox posed by the
Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin limit on the energy of cosmic rays from distant
sources. They could also play a role as dark matter in cosmology.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Reaction of Accretion Disks to Abrupt Mass Loss During Binary Black Hole
  Merger
Authors: Sean M. O'Neill, M. Coleman Miller, Tamara Bogdanovic, Christopher S. Reynolds, Jeremy D. Schnittman
Date: 2008-12-30T18:32:51Z
Abstract:   The association of an electromagnetic signal with the merger of a pair of
supermassive black holes would have many important implications. For example,
it would provide new information about gas and magnetic field interactions in
dynamical spacetimes as well as a combination of redshift and luminosity
distance that would enable precise cosmological tests. A proposal first made by
Bode & Phinney (2007) is that because radiation of gravitational waves during
the final inspiral and merger of the holes is abrupt and decreases the mass of
the central object by a few percent, there will be waves in the disk that can
steepen into shocks and thus increase the disk luminosity in a characteristic
way. We evaluate this process analytically and numerically. We find that shocks
only occur when the fractional mass loss exceeds the half-thickness (h/r) of
the disk, hence significant energy release only occurs for geometrically thin
disks which are thus at low Eddington ratios. This strongly limits the
effective energy release, and in fact our simulations show that the natural
variations in disk luminosity are likely to obscure this effect entirely.
However, we demonstrate that the reduction of luminosity caused by the retreat
of the inner edge of the disk following mass loss is potentially detectable.
This decrease occurs even if the disk is geometrically thick, and lasts for a
duration on the order of the viscous time of the modified disk.
Observationally, the best prospect for detection would be a sensitive future
X-ray instrument with a field of view of on the order of a square degree, or
possibly a wide-field radio array such as the Square Kilometer Array, if the
disk changes produce or interrupt radio emission from a jet.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A Gamma-Ray Burst/Pulsar for Cosmic-Ray Positrons with a Dark
  Matter-like Spectrum
Authors: Kunihito Ioka
Date: 2008-12-30T15:50:11Z
Abstract:   We propose that a nearby gamma-ray burst (GRB) or GRB-like (old, single and
short-lived) pulsar/supernova remnant/microquasar about 10^{5-6} years ago may
be responsible for the excesses of cosmic-ray positrons and electrons recently
observed by the PAMELA, ATIC/PPB-BETS, Fermi and HESS experiments. We can
reproduce the smooth Fermi/HESS spectra as well as the spiky ATIC/PPB-BETS
spectra. The spectra have a sharp cutoff that is similar to the dark matter
predictions, sometimes together with a line (not similar), since higher energy
cosmic-rays cool faster where the cutoff/line energy marks the source age. A
GRB-like astrophysical source is expected to have a small but finite spread in
the cutoff/line as well as anisotropy in the cosmic-ray and diffuse gamma-ray
flux, providing a method for the Fermi and future CALET experiments to
discriminate between dark matter and astrophysical origins.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Catastrophic Photo-z Errors and the Dark Energy Parameter Estimates with
  Cosmic Shear
Authors: L. Sun, Z. -H. Fan, C. Tao, J. -P. Kneib, S. Jouvel, A. Tilquin
Date: 2008-12-30T15:37:42Z
Abstract:   We study the impact of catastrophic errors occurring in the photometric
redshifts of galaxies on cosmological parameter estimates with cosmic shear
tomography. We consider a fiducial survey with 9-filter set and perform photo-z
measurement simulations. It is found that a fraction of 1% galaxies at
z_{spec}~0.4 is misidentified to be at z_{phot}~3.5. We then employ both chi^2
fitting method and the extension of Fisher matrix formalism to evaluate the
bias on the equation of state parameters of dark energy, w_0 and w_a, induced
by those catastrophic outliers. By comparing the results from both methods, we
verify that the estimation of w_0 and w_a from the fiducial 5-bin tomographic
analyses can be significantly biased. To minimize the impact of this bias, two
strategies can be followed: (A) the cosmic shear analysis is restricted to
0.5<z<2.5 where catastrophic redshift errors are expected to be insignificant;
(B) a spectroscopic survey is conducted for galaxies with 3<z_{phot}<4. We find
that the number of spectroscopic redshifts needed scales as N_{spec} \propto
f_{cata}\times A where f_{cata}=1% is the fraction of catastrophic redshift
errors (assuming a 9-filter photometric survey) and A is the survey area. For
A=1000 {deg}^2, we find that N_{spec}>320 and 860 respectively in order to
reduce the joint bias in (w_0,w_a) to be smaller than 2\sigma and 1\sigma. This
spectroscopic survey (option B) will improve the Figure of Merit of option A by
a factor \times 1.5 thus making such a survey strongly desirable.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Stellar Ages from Stellar Rotation
Authors: Soren Meibom
Date: 2008-12-30T15:07:10Z
Abstract:   Our ability to determine stellar ages from measurements of stellar rotation,
hinges on how well we can measure the dependence of rotation on age for stars
of different masses. Rotation periods for stars in open clusters are essential
to determine the relations between stellar age, rotation, and mass (color).
Until recently, ambiguities in vsini data and lack of cluster membership
information, prevented a clear empirical definition of the dependence of
rotation on color. Direct measurements of stellar rotation periods for members
in young clusters have now revealed a well-defined period-color relation. We
show new results for the open clusters M35 and M34. However, rotation periods
based on ground-based observations are limited to young clusters. The Hyades
represent the oldest coeval population of stars with measured rotation periods.
Measurements of rotation periods for older stars are needed to properly
constrain the dependence of stellar rotation on age. We present our plans to
use the Kepler space telescope to measure rotation periods in clusters as old
as and older than the Sun.


Category: astro-ph
Title: An Evolutionary Considerations for V228 from 47 Tuc
Authors: Marek J. Sarna
Date: 2008-12-30T11:14:17Z
Abstract:   We perform evolutionary calculations of binary stars to find progenitors of
system with parameters similar to the eclipsing binary system V228. We show
that a V228 binary system may be formed starting with an initial binary system
which has a low main sequence star as an accretor. The initial parameters for
the evolutionary model are as follow: $M_{1,i} = 0.88 M_\odot $, $M_{2,i} =
0.85 M_\odot $, $P_i=1.35 $days, $f_1$=0.05, $f_2$=4.65 and Z=0.006
([Fe/H]=--0.67). We also show that the best fitting model implies loss of about
50 per cent of initial total orbital momentum but only 5 per cent of initial
total mass. The less massive component have a small helium core of mass
0.12--0.17$ M_\odot $ and exchange mass in the nuclear time scale.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Source region of the 2003 November 18 CME that led to the strongest
  magnetic storm of cycle 23
Authors: N. Srivastava, S. Mathew, R. Louis, T. Wiegelmann
Date: 2008-12-30T10:07:48Z
Abstract:   The super-storm of November 20, 2003 was associated with a high speed coronal
mass ejection which originated in the NOAA AR 10501 on November 18. This
coronal mass ejection had severe terrestrial consequences leading to a
geomagnetic storm with DST index of -472 nT, the strongest of the current solar
cycle. In this paper, we attempt to understand the factors that led to the
coronal mass ejection on November 18. We have also studied the evolution of the
photospheric magnetic field of NOAA AR 10501, the source region of this coronal
mass ejection. For this purpose, the MDI line-of-sight magnetograms and vector
magnetograms from Solar Flare Telescope, Mitaka, obtained during November,
17-19, 2003 were analysed. In particular, quantitative estimates of the
temporal variation in magnetic flux, energy and magnetic field gradient were
estimated for the source active region. The evolution of these quantities was
studied for the 3-day period with an objective to understand the pre-flare
configuration leading up to the moderate flare which was associated with the
geo-effective coronal mass ejection. We also examined the chromospheric images
recorded in H-alpha from Udaipur Solar Observatory to compare the flare
location with regions of different magnetic field and energy. Our observations
provide evidence that the flare associated with the CME occurred at a location
marked by high magnetic field gradient which led to release of free energy
stored in the active region.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Further progress on solar age calibration
Authors: Günter Houdek, Douglas Gough
Date: 2008-12-30T09:56:05Z
Abstract:   We recalibrate a standard solar model seismologically to estimate the
main-sequence age of the Sun. Our procedure differs from what we have done in
the past by removing from the observed frequencies the effect of hydrogen
ionization and the superadiabatic convective boundary layer. Our preliminary
result is $t_\odot=4.63 \pm 0.02$ Gy.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Bulk viscosity of strange matter and r-modes in neutron stars
Authors: Debarati Chatterjee, Debades Bandyopadhyay
Date: 2008-12-30T07:04:16Z
Abstract:   We discuss bulk viscosity due to non-leptonic processes involving hyperons
and Bose-Einstein condensate of negatively charged kaons in neutron stars. It
is noted that the hyperon bulk viscosity coefficient is a few order of
magnitude larger than that of the case with the condensate. Further it is found
that the hyperon bulk viscosity is suppressed in a superconducting phase. The
hyperon bulk viscosity efficiently damps the r-mode instability in neutron
stars irrespective of whether a superconducting phase is present or not in
neutron star interior.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Necessity of Dark Matter in Modified Newtonian Dynamics within Galactic
  Scales? - Testing the Covariant MOND in Elliptical Lenses
Authors: M. C. Chiu, Y. Tian, C. M. Ko
Date: 2008-12-30T05:51:14Z
Abstract:   Modified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) and its relativistic version - TeVeS offer
us an alternative perspective to understand the universe without the demand of
the elusive cold dark matter. This MONDian paradigm is not only competitive
with the conventional CDM in a large range of scales, but also even more
successful in the galactic scale. Recently, by studying 6 lensing systems,
Ferreras et al. (2008) claimed that MOND still needs dark matter even in
galactic scales. When we study the same systems, however, we yield an opposite
conclusion. In this contribution, we report our result and conclude that MOND
does not need dark matter in galactic lensing systems. Furthermore, we extend
our study to 22 SLACS (Sloan Lens ACS Survey) lenses, and obtain the same
conclusion as well, i.e., no dark matter is needed in elliptical galaxies.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Origin of Europa and the Galilean Satellites
Authors: Robin M. Canup, William R. Ward
Date: 2008-12-30T01:01:52Z
Abstract:   Europa is believed to have formed near the very end of Jupiter's own
accretion, within a circumplanetary disk of gas and solid particles. We review
the formation of the Galilean satellites in the context of current constraints
and understanding of giant planet formation, focusing on recent models of
satellite growth within a circumjovian accretion disk produced during the final
stages of gas inflow to Jupiter. In such a disk, the Galilean satellites would
have accreted slowly, in more than 10^5 yr, and in a low pressure, low gas
density environment. Gravitational interactions between the satellites and the
gas disk lead to inward orbital migration and loss of satellites to Jupiter.
Such effects tend to select for a maximum satellite mass and a common total
satellite system mass compared to the planet's mass. One implication is that
multiple satellite systems may have formed and been lost during the final
stages of Jupiter's growth, with the Galilean satellites being the last
generation that survived as gas inflow to Jupiter ended. We conclude by
discussing open issues and implications for Europa's conditions of formation.


Category: astro-ph
Title: High Accuracy Near-infrared Imaging Polarimetry with NICMOS
Authors: D. Batcheldor, G. Schneider, D. C. Hines, G. D. Schmidt, D. J. Axon, A. Robinson, W. Sparks, C. Tadhunter
Date: 2008-12-29T18:22:00Z
Abstract:   The findings of a nine orbit calibration plan carried out during HST Cycle
15, to fully determine the NICMOS camera 2 (2.0 micron) polarization
calibration to high accuracy, are reported. Recently Ueta et al. and Batcheldor
et al. have suggested that NICMOS possesses a residual instrumental
polarization at a level of 1.2-1.5%. This would completely inhibit the data
reduction in a number of GO programs, and hamper the ability of the instrument
to perform high accuracy polarimetry. We obtained polarimetric calibration
observations of three polarimetric standards at three spacecraft roll angles
separated by ~60deg. Combined with archival data, these observations were used
to characterize the residual instrumental polarization in order for NICMOS to
reach its full potential of accurate imaging polarimetry at p~1%. Using these
data, we place an 0.6% upper limit on the instrumental polarization and
calculate values of the parallel transmission coefficients that reproduce the
ground-based results for the polarimetric standards. The uncertainties
associated with the parallel transmission coefficients, a result of the
photometric repeatability of the observations, are seen to dominate the
accuracy of p and theta. However, the updated coefficients do allow imaging
polarimetry of targets with p~1.0% at an accuracy of +/-0.6% and +/-15deg. This
work enables a new caliber of science with HST.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Active Galactic Nuclei, Radio Jets and Acceleration of UHECRs
Authors: S. Massaglia
Date: 2008-12-29T17:43:47Z
Abstract:   We present the general properties of the Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs) and
discuss the origin and structure of jets that are associated to a fraction of
these objects. We then we address the problems of particle acceleration at
highly relativistic energies and set limits on the luminosity of AGN jets for
being origin of UHECRs.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Compressed sensing imaging techniques for radio interferometry
Authors: Y. Wiaux, L. Jacques, G. Puy, A. M. M. Scaife, P. Vandergheynst
Date: 2008-12-29T16:35:19Z
Abstract:   Radio interferometry probes astrophysical signals through incomplete and
noisy Fourier measurements. The theory of compressed sensing demonstrates that
such measurements may actually suffice for accurate reconstruction of sparse or
compressible signals. We propose new generic imaging techniques based on convex
optimization for global minimization problems defined in this context. The
versatility of the framework notably allows introduction of specific prior
information on the signals, which offers the possibility of significant
improvements of reconstruction relative to the standard local matching pursuit
algorithm CLEAN used in radio astronomy. We illustrate the potential of the
approach by studying reconstruction performances on simulations of two
different kinds of signals observed with very generic interferometric
configurations. The first kind is an intensity field of compact astrophysical
objects. The second kind is the imprint of cosmic strings in the temperature
field of the cosmic microwave background radiation, of particular interest for
cosmology.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The CHilean Automatic Supernova sEarch (CHASE)
Authors: G. Pignata, J. Maza, M. Hamuy, R. Antezana, L. Gonzalez, P. Gonzalez, P. Lopez, S. Silva, G. Folatelli, D. Iturra, R. Cartier, F. Forster, B. Conuel, D. Reichart, K. Ivarsen, A. Crain, D. Foster, M. Nysewander, A. LaCluyze
Date: 2008-12-29T15:46:00Z
Abstract:   The CHASE project started in 2007 with the aim of providing young southern
supernovae (SNe) to the Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) and Millennium Center
for Supernova Studies (MCSS) follow-up programs. So far CHASE has discovered 33
SNe with an average of more than 2.5 SNe per month in 2008. In addition to the
search we are carrying out a follow-up program targeting bright SNe. Our fully
automated data reduction allows us to follow the evolution on the light curve
in real time, triggering further observations if something potentially
interesting is detected


Category: astro-ph
Title: Measuring interstellar magnetic fields by radio synchrotron emission
Authors: Rainer Beck
Date: 2008-12-29T15:29:28Z
Abstract:   Radio synchrotron emission, its polarization and its Faraday rotation are
powerful tools to study the strength and structure of interstellar magnetic
fields. The total intensity traces the strength and distribution of total
magnetic fields. Total fields in gas-rich spiral arms and bars of nearby
galaxies have strengths of 20-30 $\mu$Gauss, due to the amplification of
turbulent fields, and are dynamically important. In the Milky Way, the total
field strength is about 6 $\mu$G near the Sun and several 100 $\mu$G in
filaments near the Galactic Center. -- The polarized intensity measures ordered
fields with a preferred orientation, which can be regular or anisotropic
fields. Ordered fields with spiral structure exist in grand-design, barred,
flocculent and even in irregular galaxies. The strongest ordered fields are
found in interarm regions, sometimes forming "magnetic spiral arms" between the
optical arms. Halo fields are X-shaped, probably due to outflows. -- The
Faraday rotation of the polarization vectors traces coherent regular fields
which have a preferred direction. In some galaxies Faraday rotation reveals
large-scale patterns which are signatures of dynamo fields. However, in most
galaxies the field has a complicated structure and interacts with local gas
flows. In the Milky Way, diffuse polarized radio emission and Faraday rotation
of the polarized emission from pulsars and background sources show many
small-scale and large-scale magnetic features, but the overall field structure
in our Galaxy is still under debate.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Intermediate inflation on the brane
Authors: Sergio del Campo, Ramon Herrera
Date: 2008-12-29T14:10:20Z
Abstract:   Brane inflationary universe model in the context of intermediate inflation is
studied. General conditions for this model to be realizable are discussed. In
the high-energy limit we describe in great details the characteristic of this
model.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Friedmann cosmology with bulk viscosity: a concrete model for dark
  energy
Authors: X H Meng, X Dou
Date: 2008-12-29T13:14:38Z
Abstract:   The universe content is considered as a non-perfect fluid with bulk viscosity
and can be described by a general equation of state (endowed some deviation
from the conventionally assumed cosmic perfect fluid model). An explicitly bulk
viscosity dark energy model is proposed to confront consistently with the
current observational data sets by statistical analysis and is shown consistent
with (not deviated away much from) the concordant $\Lambda$ Cold Dark Matter
(CDM) model by comparing the decelerating parameter. Also we compare our
relatively simple viscosity dark energy model with a more complicated one by
contrast with the concordant $\Lambda$CDM model and find our model improves for
the viscosity dark energy model building. Finally we discuss the perspectives
of dark energy probes for the coming years with observations.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Detecting Solar Neutrino Flare in Megaton and km^3 detectors
Authors: Daniele Fargion, Paola Di Giacomo
Date: 2008-12-29T12:55:05Z
Abstract:   To foresee a solar flare neutrino signal we infer its upper and lower bound.
The upper bound was derived since a few years by general energy equipartition
arguments on observed solar particle flare. The lower bound, the most
compelling one for any guarantee neutrino signal, is derived by most recent
records of hard Gamma bump due to solar flare on January 2005 (by neutral pion
decay).The observed gamma flux reflects into a corresponding one for the
neutrinos, almost one to one. Therefore we obtain minimal bounds already at the
edge of present but quite within near future Megaton neutrino detectors. Such
detectors are considered mostly to reveal cosmic supernova background or rare
Local Group (few Mpc) Supernovas events. However Megaton or even inner ten
Megaton Ice Cube detector at ten GeV threshold may also reveal traces of solar
neutrino in hardest energy of solar flares. Icecube, marginally, too. Solar
neutrino flavors may shine light on neutrino mixing angles.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Anisotropic distribution functions for spherical galaxies
Authors: Zhenglu Jiang, Leonid Ossipkov
Date: 2008-12-29T11:54:29Z
Abstract:   A method is presented for finding anisotropic distribution functions for
stellar systems with known, spherically symmetric, densities, which depends
only on the two classical integrals of the energy and the magnitude of the
angular momentum. It requires the density to be expressed as a sum of products
of functions of the potential and of the radial coordinate. The solution
corresponding to this type of density is in turn a sum of products of functions
of the energy and of the magnitude of the angular momentum. The products of the
density and its radial and transverse velocity dispersions can be also
expressed as a sum of products of functions of the potential and of the radial
coordinate. Several examples are given, including some of new anisotropic
distribution functions. This device can be extended further to the related
problem of finding two-integral distribution functions for axisymmetric
galaxies.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Consistency of Equations in the Second-order Gauge-invariant
  Cosmological Perturbation Theory
Authors: Kouji Nakamura
Date: 2008-12-29T11:27:07Z
Abstract:   Along the general framework of the gauge-invariant perturbation theory
developed in the papers [K. Nakamura, Prog. Theor. Phys. {\bf 110} (2003), 723;
{\it ibid}, {\bf 113} (2005), 481.], we re-derive the second-order Einstein
equations on four-dimensional homogeneous isotropic background universe in
gauge-invariant manner without ignoring any mode of perturbations. We consider
the perturbations both in the universe dominated by the single perfect fluid
and in that dominated by the single scalar field. We also confirmed the
consistency of all equations of the second-order Einstein equation and the
equations of motion for matter fields which are derived in the paper [K.
Nakamura, arXiv:0804.3840 [gr-qc]]. This confirmation implies that the all
derived equations of the second order are self-consistent and these equations
are correct in this sense.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Quantum vacuum and accelerated expansion
Authors: Bogusław Broda, Michał Szanecki
Date: 2008-12-29T10:51:00Z
Abstract:   A new approach to extraction of quantum vacuum energy, in the context of the
accelerated expansion, is proposed, and it is shown that experimentally
realistic orders of values can be derived. The idea has been implemented in the
framework of the Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker geometry in the language
of the effective action in the relativistic formalism of Schwinger's proper
time and Seeley-DeWitt's heat kernel expansion.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Near-IR spectroscopic ages of massive star clusters in M82
Authors: A. Lançon, J. S. Gallagher III, M. Mouhcine, L. J. Smith, D. Ladjal, R. de Grijs
Date: 2008-12-29T10:14:35Z
Abstract:   Like other starburst galaxies, M82 hosts compact, massive young star clusters
that are interesting both in their own right and as benchmarks for population
synthesis models. Can spectral synthesis models at resolutions around 1000
adequately reproduce the near-IR spectral features and the energy distribution
of these clusters between 0.8 and 2.4 microns? How do the derived cluster
properties compare with previous results from optical studies?
  We analyse the spectra of 5 massive clusters in M82, using data acquired with
the spectrograph SpeX on the InfraRed Telescope Facility (NASA/IRTF) and a new
population synthesis tool with a highly improved near-IR extension, based on a
recent collection of empirical and theoretical spectra of red supergiant stars.
We obtain excellent fits across the near-IR with models at quasi-solar
metallicity and a solar neighbourhood extinction law. Spectroscopy breaks a
strong degeneracy between age and extinction in the near-IR colours in the red
supergiant-dominated phase of evolution. The estimated near-IR ages cluster
between 9 and 30 Myr, i.e. the ages at which the molecular bands due to
luminous red supergiants are strongest in the current models. They do not
always agree with optical spectroscopic ages. Adding optical data sometimes
leads to the rejection of the solar neighbourhood extinction law. This is not
surprising considering small-scale structure around the clusters, but it has no
significant effect on the near-IR based spectroscopic ages. [abridged]


Category: astro-ph
Title: Infall and rotation motions in the HH 111 protostellar system: A
  flattened envelope in transition to a disk?
Authors: Chin-Fei Lee, Yao-Yuan Mao, Bo Reipurth
Date: 2008-12-29T07:33:57Z
Abstract:   We have mapped the central region of the HH 111 protostellar system in 1.33
mm continuum, C18O(J=2-1), 13CO (J=2-1), and SO (N_J=5_6-4_5) emission at ~3"
resolution with the Submillimeter Array. There are two sources, VLA 1 (=IRAS
05491+0247) and VLA 2, with the VLA 1 source driving the HH 111 jet. Thermal
emission is seen in 1.33 mm continuum tracing the dust in the envelope and the
putative disks around the sources. A flattened, torus-like envelope is seen in
C18O and 13CO around the VLA 1 source surrounding the dust lane perpendicular
to the jet axis, with an inner radius of ~ 400 AU (1"), an outer radius of ~
3200 AU (8"), and a thickness of ~ 1000 AU (2.5"). It seems to be infalling
toward the center with conservation of specific angular momentum rather than
with a Keplerian rotation as assumed by Yang et al. 1997. An inner envelope is
seen in SO, with a radius of ~ 500 AU (1.3"). The inner part of this inner
envelope, which is spatially coincident with the dust lane, seems to have a
differential rotation and thus may have formed a rotationally supported disk.
The outer part of this inner envelope, however, may have a rotation velocity
decreasing toward the center and thus represent a region where an infalling
envelope is in transition to a rotationally supported disk. A brief comparison
with a collapsing model suggests that the flattened, torus-like envelope seen
in C18O and 13CO could result from a collapse of a magnetized rotating toroid.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Untwisting magnetospheres of neutron stars
Authors: Andrei M. Beloborodov
Date: 2008-12-29T05:21:15Z
Abstract:   Magnetospheres of neutron stars are anchored in the rigid crust and can be
twisted by sudden crustal motions ("starquakes"). The twisted magnetosphere
does not remain static and gradually untwists, dissipating magnetic energy and
producing radiation. The equation describing this evolution is derived, and its
solutions are presented. Two distinct regions coexist in untwisting
magnetospheres: a potential region where curl(B)=0 ("cavity") and a
current-carrying bundle of field lines ("j-bundle"). The cavity has a sharp
boundary, which expands with time and eventually erases all of the twist. In
this process, the electric current of the j-bundle is sucked into the star.
Observational appearance of the untwisting process is discussed. A hot spot
forms at the footprints of the j-bundle. The spot shrinks with time toward the
magnetic dipole axis, and its luminosity and temperature gradually decrease. As
the j-bundle shrinks, the amplitude of its twist can grow to the maximum
possible value ~ 1. The strong twist near the dipole axis increases the
spindown rate of the star and can generate a broad beam of radio emission. The
model explains the puzzling behavior of magnetar XTE J1810-197 -- a canonical
example of magnetospheric evolution following a starquake. We also discuss
implications for other magnetars. The untwisting theory suggests that the
nonthermal radiation of magnetars is preferentially generated on a bundle of
extended closed field lines near the dipole axis.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Dynamic masses for the close PG1159 binary SDSSJ212531.92-010745.9
Authors: S Schuh, B Beeck, T Nagel
Date: 2008-12-28T22:37:25Z
Abstract:   SDSSJ212531.92-010745.9 is the first known PG1159 star in a close binary with
a late main sequence companion allowing a dynamical mass determination. The
system shows flux variations with a peak-to-peak amplitude of about 0.7 mag and
a period of about 6.96h. In August 2007, 13 spectra of SDSSJ212531.92-010745.9
covering the full orbital phase range were taken at the TWIN 3.5m telescope at
the Calar Alto Observatory (Alm\'{e}ria, Spain). These confirm the typical
PG1159 features seen in the SDSS discovery spectrum, together with the Balmer
series of hydrogen in emission (plus other emission lines), interpreted as
signature of the companion's irradiated side. A radial velocity curve was
obtained for both components. Using co-added radial-velocity-corrected spectra,
the spectral analysis of the PG1159 star is being refined.
  The system's lightcurve, obtained during three seasons of photometry with the
G\"ottingen 50cm and T\"ubingen 80cm telescopes, was fitted with both the
NIGHTFALL and PHOEBE binary simulation programs. An accurate mass determination
of the PG1159 component from the radial velocity measurements requires to first
derive the inclination, which requires light curve modelling and yields further
constraints on radii, effective temperature and separation of the system's
components. From the analysis of all data available so far, we present the
possible mass range for the PG1159 component of SDSSJ212531.92-010745.9.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Long-term photometric monitoring of the hybrid subdwarf B pulsator
  HS0702+6043
Authors: R. Lutz, S. Schuh, R. Silvotti, R. Kruspe, S. Dreizler
Date: 2008-12-28T22:19:54Z
Abstract:   Pulsating subdwarf B stars oscillate in short-period $p$-modes or long-period
$g$-modes. HS 0702 + 6043 is one of currently three objects known to show
characteristics of both types and hence is classified as hybrid pulsator. We
briefly present our analysis of the $g$-mode domain of this star, but focus on
first results from long-term photometric monitoring in particular of the
$p$-mode oscillations. We present a high-resolution frequency spectrum, and
report on our efforts to construct a multi-season O--C diagram. Additionally to
the standard (although nontrivial) exercise in asteroseismology to probe the
instantaneous inner structure of a star, measured changes in the pulsation
frequencies as derived from an {O--C} diagram can be compared to theoretical
evolutionary timescales. Within the {EXOTIME} program, we also use this same
data to search for planetary companions around extreme horizontal branch
objects.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Spectroscopy of the sdB pulsator HS2201+2610
Authors: R. Kruspe, S. Schuh, R. Silvotti, I. Traulsen
Date: 2008-12-28T22:19:52Z
Abstract:   We present time resolved echelle spectra of the planet-hosting subdwarf B
pulsator HS 2201 + 2610 and report on our efforts to extract pulsational radial
velocity measurements from this data.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Multi-wavelength photometric variation of PG1605+072
Authors: S. Schuh, S. Dreizler, U. Heber, C. S. Jeffery, S. J. O'Toole, O. Cordes, T. Stahn, R. Lutz, A. Tillich, the WET, MSST collaborations
Date: 2008-12-28T22:19:50Z
Abstract:   In a large coordinated attempt to further our understanding of the $p$-mode
pulsating sdB star PG1605+072, the Multi-Site Spectroscopic Telescope (MSST)
collaboration has obtained simultaneous time-resolved spectroscopic and
photometric observations. The photometry was extended by additional WET data
which increased the time base. This contribution outlines the analysis of the
MSST photometric light curve, including the four-colour BUSCA data from which
chromatic amplitudes have been derived, as well as supplementary FUV spectra
and light curves from two different epochs. These results have the potential to
complement the interpretation of the published spectroscopic information.


Category: astro-ph
Title: PIERNIK mhd code - a multi-fluid, non-ideal extension of the
  relaxing-TVD scheme (III)
Authors: Michał Hanasz, Kacper Kowalik, Dominik Wóltański, Rafał Pawłaszek
Date: 2008-12-28T21:58:01Z
Abstract:   We present a new multi-fluid, grid MHD code PIERNIK, which is based on the
Relaxing TVD scheme (Jin & Xin, 1995). The original scheme (see Trac & Pen
(2003) and Pen et al. (2003)) has been extended by an addition of dynamically
independent, but interacting fluids: dust and a diffusive cosmic ray gas,
described within the fluid approximation, with an option to add other fluids in
an easy way. The code has been equipped with shearing-box boundary conditions,
and a selfgravity module, Ohmic resistivity module, as well as other facilities
which are useful in astrophysical fluid-dynamical simulations. The code is
parallelized by means of the MPI library. In this paper we present Ohmic
resistivity extension of the original Relaxing TVD MHD scheme, and show
examples of magnetic reconnection in cases of uniform and current-dependent
resistivity prescriptions.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Dark Stars: the First Stars in the Universe may be powered by Dark
  Matter Heating
Authors: Katherine Freese, Peter Bodenheimer, Paolo Gondolo, Douglas Spolyar
Date: 2008-12-28T20:12:01Z
Abstract:   A new line of research on Dark Stars is reviewed, which suggests that the
first stars to exist in the universe were powered by dark matter heating rather
than by fusion. Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, which may be there own
antipartmers, collect inside the first stars and annihilate to produce a heat
source that can power the stars. A new stellar phase results, a Dark Star,
powered by dark matter annihilation as long as there is dark matter fuel.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Orbital resonances in discs around braneworld Kerr black holes
Authors: Zdenek Stuchlik, Andrea Kotrlova
Date: 2008-12-28T17:26:30Z
Abstract:   Rotating black holes in the brany universe of the Randall-Sundrum type are
described by the Kerr geometry with a tidal charge b representing the
interaction of the brany black hole and the bulk spacetime. For b<0 rotating
black holes with dimensionless spin a>1 are allowed. We investigate the role of
the tidal charge b in the orbital resonance model of QPOs in black hole
systems. The orbital Keplerian, the radial and vertical epicyclic frequencies
of the equatorial, quasicircular geodetical motion are given and their radial
profiles are discussed. The resonant conditions are given in three
astrophysically relevant situations: for direct (parametric) resonances, for
the relativistic precession model, and for some trapped oscillations of the
warped discs, with resonant combinational frequencies. It is shown, how b could
influence matching of the observational data indicating the 3:2 frequency ratio
observed in GRS 1915+105 microquasar with prediction of the orbital resonance
model; limits on allowed range of the black hole parameters a and b are
established. The "magic" dimensionless black hole spin enabling presence of
strong resonant phenomena at the radius where \nu_K:\nu_{\theta}:\nu_r=3:2:1 is
determined in dependence on b. Such strong resonances could be relevant even in
sources with highly scattered resonant frequencies, as those expected in Sgr
A*. The specific values of a and b are given also for existence of specific
radius where \nu_K:\nu_{\theta}:\nu_r=s:t:u with 5>=s>t>u being small natural
numbers. It is shown that for some ratios such situation is impossible in the
field of black holes. We can conclude that analysing the microquasars
high-frequency QPOs in the framework of orbital resonance models, we can put
relevant limits on the tidal charge of brany Kerr black holes.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The variation of the electromagnetic coupling and quintessence
Authors: M. C. Bento, R. Gonzalez Felipe
Date: 2008-12-28T16:33:00Z
Abstract:   The properties of quintessence are examined through the study of the
variation of the electromagnetic coupling. We consider two simple quintessence
models with a modified exponential potential and study the parameter space
constraints derived from the existing observational bounds on the variation of
the fine structure constant and the most recent Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe observations.


Category: astro-ph
Title: 3D Spectroscopic Study of the Line Emitting Regions of Mrk 493
Authors: L. C. Popovic, A. A. Smirnova, J. Kovacevic, A. V Moiseev, V. L. Afanasiev
Date: 2008-12-28T12:57:48Z
Abstract:   We report the results of 3D spectroscopic observations of Mrk 493 (NLS1
galaxy) with the integral-field spectrograph MPFS of the SAO RAS 6-m telescope.
The difference in the slope of the optical continuum emission intensity across
the nucleus part and an extensive continuum emission region} is detected. The
emission in lines (H$\alpha$, H$\beta$, [OIII], etc.) coincides with a
composite nuclear region: an AGN plus a circum-nuclear star-forming ring
observed in the HST UV/optical images. The [SII] emission region tends to be up
to 1kpc around the center. The H$\alpha$ and H$\beta$ could be decomposed into
three components (broad $\sim$ 2000 km/s. intermediate $\sim$ 700 km/s and
narrow $\sim$ 250 km/s). We found that width ($\sim$ 750 km/s) of the Fe II
lines correspond to the intermediate component, that may indicate a non-BLR
origin of the Fe II lines, or that a large fraction of the Fe II emission arise
in the outher parts of the BLR. The weak broad component detected in the
H$\alpha$, H$\beta$ and He$\lambda$4686 may come from the unresolved central
BLR, but also partly produced by violent starburst in the circum-nuclear ring.
Moreover, diagnostic diagrams clearly show presence of the HII regions (not a
Sy 1 nucleus) in the NLR of Mrk 493.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Angular Energy Distribution of Collapsar-Jets
Authors: Akira Mizuta, Miguel A. Aloy
Date: 2008-12-28T12:26:54Z
Abstract:   Collapsars are fast-spinning, massive stars, whose core collapse liberates an
energy, that can be channeled in the form of ultrarelativistic jets. These jets
transport the energy from the collapsed core to large distances, where it is
dissipated in the form of long-duration gamma-ray bursts. In this paper we
study the dynamics of ultrarelativistic jets produced in collapsars. Also we
extrapolate our results to infer the angular energy distribution of the
produced outflows in the afterglow phase. Our main focus is to look for global
energetical properties which can be imprinted by the different structure of
different progenitor stars. Thus, we employ a number of pre-supernova, stellar
models (with distinct masses and metallicities), and inject in all of them jets
with fixed initial conditions. We assume that at the injection nozzle, the jet
is mildly relativistic (Lorentz factor $\sim 5$), has a finite half-opening
angle ($5^\circ$), and carries a power of $10^{51} $erg s$^{-1}$. These jets
arrive intact to the stellar surface and break out of it. A large Lorentz
factor region $\Gamma\simmore 100$ develops well before the jet reaches the
surface of the star, in the unshocked part of the beam, located between the
injection nozzle and the first recollimation shock. These high values of
$\Gamma$ are possible because the finite opening angle of the jet allows for
free expansion towards the radial direction. We find a strong correlation
between the angular energy distribution of the jet, after its eruption from the
progenitor surface, and the mass of the progenitors. The angular energy
distribution of the jets from light progenitor models is steeper than that of
the jets injected in more massive progenitor stars. This trend is also
imprinted in the angular distribution of isotropic equivalent energy.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Explosions inside Ejecta and Most Luminous Supernovae
Authors: S. I. Blinnikov
Date: 2008-12-28T09:40:17Z
Abstract:   The extremely luminous supernova SN2006gy is explained in the same way as
other SNIIn events: light is produced by a radiative shock propagating in a
dense circumstellar envelope formed by a previous weak explosion. The problems
in the theory and observations of multiple-explosion SNe IIn are briefly
reviewed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Quasi-viscous accretion flow -- I: Equilibrium conditions and asymptotic
  behaviour
Authors: Jayanta K. Bhattacharjee, Atri Bhattacharya, Tapas K. Das, Arnab K. Ray
Date: 2008-12-28T05:10:56Z
Abstract:   In a novel approach to studying viscous accretion flows, viscosity has been
introduced as a perturbative effect, involving a first-order correction in the
$\alpha$-viscosity parameter. This method reduces the problem of solving a
second-order nonlinear differential equation (Navier-Stokes equation) to that
of an effective first-order equation. Viscosity breaks down the invariance of
the equilibrium conditions for stationary inflow and outflow solutions, and
distinguishes accretion from wind. Under a dynamical systems classification,
the only feasible critical points of this "quasi-viscous" flow are saddle
points and spirals. A linearised and radially propagating time-dependent
perturbation gives rise to secular instability on large spatial scales of the
disc. Further, on these same length scales, the velocity evolution equation of
the quasi-viscous flow has been transformed to bear a formal closeness with
Schr\"odinger's equation with a repulsive potential. Compatible with the
transport of angular momentum to the outer regions of the disc, a
viscosity-limited length scale has been defined for the full spatial extent
over which the accretion process would be viable.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Observations of the pulsation of the Cepheid l Car with the Sydney
  University Stellar Interferometer
Authors: J. Davis, A. P. Jacob, J. G. Robertson, M. J. Ireland, J. R. North, W. J. Tango, P. G. Tuthill
Date: 2008-12-28T04:36:38Z
Abstract:   Observations of the southern Cepheid l Car to yield the mean angular diameter
and angular pulsation amplitude have been made with the Sydney University
Stellar Interferometer (SUSI) at a wavelength of 696 nm. The resulting mean
limb-darkened angular diameter is 2.990+-0.017 mas (i.e. +-0.6 per cent) with a
maximum-to-minimum amplitude of 0.560+-0.018 mas corresponding to 18.7+-0.6 per
cent in the mean stellar diameter. Careful attention has been paid to
uncertainties, including those in measurements, in the adopted calibrator
angular diameters, in the projected values of visibility squared at zero
baseline, and to systematic effects. No evidence was found for a circumstellar
envelope at 696 nm. The interferometric results have been combined with radial
displacements of the stellar atmosphere derived from selected radial velocity
data taken from the literature to determine the distance and mean diameter of l
Car. The distance is determined to be 525+-26 pc and the mean radius
169+-8R{solar). Comparison with published values for the distance and mean
radius show excellent agreement, particularly when a common scaling factor from
observed radial velocity to pulsation velocity of the stellar atmosphere (the
p-factor) is used.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Jet breaks and Energetics of Swift GRB X-ray Afterglows
Authors: J. L. Racusin, E. W. Liang, D. N. Burrows, A. Falcone, T. Sakamoto, B. B. Zhang, B. Zhang, P. Evans, J. Osborne
Date: 2008-12-28T00:22:12Z
Abstract:   We present a systematic temporal and spectral study of all Swift-XRT
observations of GRB afterglows discovered between 2005 January and 2007
December. After constructing and fitting all light curves and spectra to
power-law models, we classify the components of each afterglow in terms of the
canonical X-ray afterglow and test them against the closure relations of the
forward shock models for a variety of parameter combinations. The closure
relations are used to identify potential jet breaks with characteristics
including the uniform jet model with and without lateral spreading and energy
injection, and a power-law structured jet model, all with a range of
parameters. With this technique, we survey the X-ray afterglows with strong
evidence for jet breaks (~12% of our sample), and reveal cases of potential jet
breaks that do not appear plainly from the light curve alone (another ~30%),
leading to insight into the missing jet break problem. Those X-ray light curves
that do not show breaks or have breaks that are not consistent with one of the
jet models are explored to place limits on the times of unseen jet breaks. The
distribution of jet break times ranges from a few hours to a few weeks with a
median of ~1 day, similar to what was found pre-Swift. On average Swift GRBs
have lower isotropic equivalent gamma-ray energies, which in turn results in
lower collimation corrected gamma-ray energies than those of pre-Swift GRBs.
Finally, we explore the implications for GRB jet geometry and energetics.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Constraints on Dark Energy from the Observed Expansion of our Cosmic
  Horizon
Authors: Fulvio Melia
Date: 2008-12-27T23:44:55Z
Abstract:   Within the context of standard cosmology, an accelerating universe requires
the presence of a third `dark' component of energy, beyond matter and
radiation. The available data, however, are still deemed insufficient to
distinguish between an evolving dark energy component and the simplest model of
a time-independent cosmological constant. In this paper, we examine the
cosmological expansion in terms of observer-dependent coordinates, in addition
to the more conventional co-moving coordinates. This procedure explicitly
reveals the role played by the radius R_h of our cosmic horizon in the
interrogation of the data. (In Rindler's notation, R_h coincides with the
`event horizon' in the case of de Sitter, but changes in time for other
cosmologies that also contain matter and/or radiation.) With this approach, we
show that the interpretation of dark energy as a cosmological constant is
clearly disfavored by the observations. Within the framework of standard
Friedman-Robertson-Walker cosmology, we derive an equation describing the
evolution of R_h, and solve it using the WMAP and Type Ia supernova data. In
particular, we consider the meaning of the observed equality (or near equality)
R_h(t_0) ~ ct_0, where t_0 is the age of the Universe. This empirical result is
far from trivial, for a cosmological constant would drive R_h(t) towards ct
(where t is the cosmic time) only once--and that would have to occur right now.
Though we are not here espousing any particular alternative model of dark
energy, for comparison we also consider scenarios in which dark energy is given
by scaling solutions, which simultaneously eliminate several conundrums in the
standard model, including the `coincidence' and `flatness' problems, and
account very well for the fact that R_h(t_0) ~ ct_0.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Reversal of the amplitude difference of kHz QPOs in six atoll sources
Authors: Gabriel Torok
Date: 2008-12-27T22:11:36Z
Abstract:   AIMS: For six neutron-star atoll sources (4U 1608-52, 4U 1636-53, 4U 0614+09,
4U 1728-34, 4U 1820-30 and 4U 1735-44) we investigate the relationship between
the observed fractional rms amplitudes of the twin kHz QPOs. We discuss whether
this displays features that could have a physical meaning in terms of the
proposed QPO models. METHOD: We consider the difference in rms amplitude
between the upper and lower kHz QPOs, as a function of the frequency ratio R.
We compare two data sets. Set I is a collection taken from published data. Set
II has rms amplitude values obtained by automatic fitting of continuous
segments of RXTE-PCA observations. RESULTS: For each of the six sources, we
find that there is a point in the R domain around which the amplitudes of the
two twin kHz QPOs are the same. We find such a point located inside a narrow
interval R=1.5 +-3%. Further investigation is needed in the case of two sources
to explore this finding, since we have not determined this point in Set II.
There is evidence of a similar point close to R = 1.33 or R = 1.25 in the four
sources. We suggest that some of these points may correspond to the documented
clustering of the twin kHz QPO frequency ratios. CONCLUSIONS: For the sources
studied, the rms amplitudes of the two kHz peaks become equal when the
frequencies of the oscillations pass through a certain ratio R, which is
roughly the same for each of the sources. In terms of the orbital QPO models,
with some assumptions concerning the QPO modulation, this finding implies the
existence of a specific orbit at a common value of the dimensionless radius, at
which the oscillations corresponding to the two peaks come into balance. In a
more general context, the amplitude difference behaviour suggests the possible
existence of an energy interchange between the upper and lower QPO modes.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The origin of 'Great Walls'
Authors: Sergei Shandarin
Date: 2008-12-27T21:20:08Z
Abstract:   A new semianalytical model that explains the formation and sizes of the
'great walls' - the largest structures observed in the universe is suggested.
Although the basis of the model is the Zel'dovich approximation it has been
used in a new way very different from the previous studies. Instead of
traditional approach that evaluates the nonlinear density field it has been
utilized for identification of the regions in Lagrangian space that after the
mapping to real or redshift space (depending on the kind of structure is
studied) end up in the regions where shell-crossing occurs. The set of these
regions in Lagrangian space form the progenitor of the structure and after the
mapping it determines the pattern of the structure in real or redshift space.
The particle trajectories have crossed in such regions and the mapping is no
longer unique there. The progenitor after mapping makes only one stream in the
multi-stream flow regions therefore it does not comprise all the mass.
Nevertheless, it approximately retains the shape of the structure. The
progenitor of the structure in redshift space depends on a few non-Gaussian
fields and also it is strongly affected by two anisotropic fields that
determine the pattern of great walls as well as their huge sizes. All the
fields used in the mappings are derived from the linear potential smoothed at
the current scale of nonlinearity which is $R_{nl} = 2.7$ {\hmpc} for the
adopted parameters of the \lcdm universe normalized to $\sigma_8 = 0.8$. The
model predicts the existence of walls with sizes significantly greater than 500
{\hmpc} that may be found in sufficiently large redshift surveys.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Thermal axion constraints in non-standard thermal histories
Authors: Daniel Grin, Tristan Smith, Marc Kamionkowski
Date: 2008-12-27T02:15:33Z
Abstract:   There is no direct evidence for radiation domination prior to big-bang
nucleosynthesis, and so it is useful to consider how constraints to
thermally-produced axions change in non-standard thermal histories. In the
low-temperature-reheating scenario, radiation domination begins at temperatures
as low as 1 MeV, and is preceded by significant entropy generation. Axion
abundances are then suppressed, and cosmological limits to axions are
significantly loosened. In a kination scenario, a more modest change to axion
constraints occurs. Future possible constraints to axions and low-temperature
reheating are discussed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Realistic analytic model for the prompt and high latitude emission in
  GRBs
Authors: F. Genet, J. Granot
Date: 2008-12-26T13:34:50Z
Abstract:   Most gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) observed by the Swift satellite show an early
rapid decay phase (RDP) in their X-ray lightcurve, which is usually a smooth
continuation of the prompt gamma-ray emission, strongly suggesting that it is
its tail. However, the mechanism behind it is still not clear. The most popular
model for this RDP is High Latitude Emission (HLE). While HLE is expected in
many models for the prompt GRB emission, such as the popular internal shocks
model, there are models in which it is not expected, such as sporadic magnetic
reconnection events. Therefore, testing whether the RDP is consistent with HLE
can help distinguish between different prompt emission models. We address this
question by modeling the prompt emission as the sum of its individual pulses
with their HLE tails. Analytic expressions for the observed flux density are
obtained for power-law and Band function emission spectra. For internal shocks
the observed instantaneous spectrum is very close to the emitted one, and
should be well described by a Band function also during the RDP. Our model
naturally produces, the observed spectral softening and steepening of the flux
decay. The observed flux during the RDP is initially dominated by the tail of
the last pulse, but the tails of one or more earlier pulses can become dominant
later on. Moreover, modeling several overlapping pulses as a single wider pulse
would over-predict the emission tail. Thus, one should be very careful when
testing the predictions of HLE and do a combined temporal and spectral fit of
the prompt GRB emission and the RDP.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Rapid pulsations in sub-THz solar bursts
Authors: Pierre Kaufmann, C. Guillermo Gimenez de Castro, Emilia Correia, Joaquim E. R. Costa, Jean-Pierre Raulin, Adriana Silva Valio
Date: 2008-12-26T11:54:31Z
Abstract:   A new solar burst emission spectral component has been found showing sub-THz
fluxes increasing with frequency, spectrally separated from the well known
microwave component. Rapid pulsations are found present in all events observed
at the two frequencies of the solar submillimeter-wave telescope (SST): 212 and
405 GHz. They were studied in greater detail for three solar bursts exhibiting
the new THz spectral component. The pulse amplitudes are of about 5-8% of the
mean flux throughout the bursts durations, being comparable for both
frequencies. Pulsations range from one pulse every few seconds to 8-10 per
second. The pulse repetition rates (R) are linearly proportional to the mean
burst fluxes (S), following the simple relationship S = k R, suggesting that
the pulsations might be the response to discrete flare particle accelerator
injections quantized in energy. Although this result is consistent with
qualitative trends previously found in the GHz range, the pulse amplitude
relative to the mean fluxes at the sub-THz frequencies appear to be nearly ten
times smaller than expected from the extrapolation of the trends found in the
GHz range. However there are difficulties to reconcile the nearly simultaneous
GHz and THz burst emission spectrally separated components, exhibiting rapid
pulsations with considerably larger relative intensities in the GHz range.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Photometric Properties of the Near-contact Binary GW Geminorum
Authors: Jae Woo Lee, Seung-Lee Kim, Chung-Uk Lee, Ho-Il Kim, Jang-Ho Park, So-Ra Park, Robert H. Koch
Date: 2008-12-25T23:59:03Z
Abstract:   New multiband CCD photometry is presented for the eclipsing binary GW Gem;
the $RI$ light curves are the first ever compiled. Four new minimum timings
have been determined. Our analysis of eclipse timings observed during the past
79 years indicates a continuous period increase at a fractional rate of
+(1.2$\pm$0.1)$\times10^{-10}$, in excellent agreement with the value
$+1.1\times10^{-10}$ calculated from the Wilson-Devinney binary code. The new
light curves display an inverse O'Connell effect increasing toward longer
wavelengths. Hot and cool spot models are developed to describe these
variations but we prefer a cool spot on the secondary star. Our light-curve
synthesis reveals that GW Gem is in a semi-detached, but near-contact,
configuration. It appears to consist of a near-main-sequence primary star with
a spectral type of about A7 and an evolved early K-type secondary star that
completely fills its inner Roche lobe. Mass transfer from the secondary to the
primary component is responsible for the observed secular period change.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Preheating in the Standard Model with the Higgs-Inflaton coupled to
  gravity
Authors: Juan Garcia-Bellido, Daniel G. Figueroa, Javier Rubio
Date: 2008-12-25T19:33:07Z
Abstract:   We study the details of preheating in an inflationary scenario in which the
Standard Model Higgs, strongly non-minimally coupled to gravity, plays the role
of the inflaton. We find that the Universe does not reheat immediately through
perturbative decays, but rather initiate a complex process in which
perturbative and non-perturbative effects are mixed. The Higgs condesate starts
oscillating around the minimum of its potential, producing W and Z gauge bosons
non-perturbatively, due to violation of the so-called adiabaticity condition.
However, during each semi-oscillation, the created gauge bosons completely
decay (perturbatively) into fermions. This way, the decay of the gauge bosons
prevents the development of parametric resonance, since bosons cannot
accummulate significantly at the beginning. However, the energy transferred to
the decay products of the bosons is not enough to reheat the universe, so after
about a hundred oscillations, the resonance effect will finally dominate over
the perturbative decays. Around the same time (or slightly earlier),
backreaction from the gauge bosons onto the Higgs condensate will also start to
be significant. Soon afterwards, the Universe is filled with the remnant
condensate of the Higgs and a non-thermal distribution of Standard Model
particles which redshift as radiation, while the Higgs continues to oscillate
as a pressureless fluid. We compute the distribution of energy among all the
species present at backreaction. From there on until thermalization, the
evolution of the system is highly non-linear and non-perturbative, and will
require a careful study via numerical simulations.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Adiabatic expansion and magnetic fields in AGN jets
Authors: A. B. Pushkarev, Y. Y. Kovalev, A. P. Lobanov
Date: 2008-12-25T16:54:15Z
Abstract:   Results of high-resolution simultaneous multi-frequency 8.1-15.4 GHz VLBA
polarimetric observations of relativistic jets in active galactic nuclei (the
MOJAVE-2 project) are analyzed. We compare characteristics of VLBI features
with jet model predictions and test if adiabatic expansion is a dominating
mechanism for the evolution of relativistic shocks in parsec-scale AGN jets. We
also discuss magnetic field configuration, both predicted by the model and
deduced from electric vector position angle measurements.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Probing parsec scale jets in AGN with geodetic VLBI
Authors: A. B. Pushkarev, Y. Y. Kovalev
Date: 2008-12-25T16:38:49Z
Abstract:   We report on an ongoing effort to image active galactic nuclei simultaneously
observed at 2.3 and 8.6 GHz in the framework of a long-term VLBI project RDV
(Research and Development - VLBA) started in 1994 aiming to observe compact
extragalactic radio sources in the astrometric/geodetic mode. Observations of
bright extragalactic sources are carried out bi-monthly making up to six
sessions per year with participation of all ten VLBA antennas and up to nine
additional (geodetic and EVN) radio telescopes. Analysis of single-epoch
results for 370 quasars, BL Lacs and radio galaxies is presented. We discuss
VLBI core properties (flux densities, sizes, brightness temperatures), spectral
characteristics of the cores and jets, evolution of brightness temperatures in
the jets.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Search for the magnetic field of the O7.5 III star xi Persei
Authors: H. F. Henrichs, R. S. Schnerr, J. A. de Jong, L. Kaper, J. -F. Donati, C. Catala
Date: 2008-12-25T12:28:50Z
Abstract:   Cyclical wind variability is an ubiquitous but as yet unexplained feature
among OB stars. The O7.5 III(n)((f)) star xi Persei is the brightest
representative of this class on the Northern hemisphere. As its prominent
cyclical wind properties vary on a rotational time scale (2 or 4 days) the star
has been already for a long time a serious magnetic candidate. As the cause of
this enigmatic behavior non-radial pulsations and/or a surface magnetic field
are suggested. We present a preliminary report on our attempts to detect a
magnetic field in this star with high-resolution measurements obtained with the
spectropolarimeter Narval at TBL, France during 2 observing runs of 5 nights in
2006 and 5 nights in 2007. Only upper limits could be obtained, even with the
longest possible exposure times. If the star hosts a magnetic field, its
surface strength should be less than about 300 G. This would still be enough to
disturb the stellar wind significantly. From our new data it seems that the
amplitude of the known non-radial pulsations has changed within less than a
year, which needs further investigation.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A New Model For Vela Jr. Supernova Remnant
Authors: Igor Telezhinsky
Date: 2008-12-25T12:27:30Z
Abstract:   We consider Vela Jr. as being the old Supernova Remnant (SNR) at the
beginning of the transition from adiabatic to radiative stage of evolution.
According to our model, Vela Jr. is situated outside Vela SNR at the distance
of 600 pc and its age is 17500 yr. We model the high energy fluxes from Vela
Jr. and its broadband spectrum. We find our results compatible with
experimental data in radio waves, X- and gamma-rays. Our hydrodynamical model
of Vela Jr. explains the observed TeV gamma-ray flux by hadronic mechanism. The
proposed model does not contradict to the low density environment of the SNR
and does not need extreme fraction of the explosion energy to be transferred to
Cosmic Rays.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The magnetic field of the B3V star 16 Pegasi
Authors: H. F. Henrichs, C. Neiner, R. S. Schnerr, E. Verdugo, A. Alecian, C. Catala, F. Cochard, J. Gutiérrez, A. -L. Huat, J. Silvester, O. Thizy
Date: 2008-12-25T12:21:24Z
Abstract:   The Slowly Pulsating B3V star 16 Pegasi was discovered by Hubrig (2006) to be
magnetic, based on low-resolution spectropolarimetric observations with FORS1
at the VLT. We have confirmed the presence of a magnetic field with new
measurements with the spectropolarimeters Narval at TBL, France and Espadons at
CFHT, Hawaii during 2007. The most likely period is about 1.44 d for the
modulation of the field, but this could not be firmly established with the
available data set. No variability has been found in the UV stellar wind lines.
Although the star was reported once to show H alpha in emission, there exists
at present no confirmation that the star is a Be star.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Scenarios for GCRT J1745-3009
Authors: S. B. Popov
Date: 2008-12-25T06:08:13Z
Abstract:   I discuss several scenarios to explain properties of the radio transient
source GCRT J1745-3009. Namely, a highly magnetized neutron star on the
propeller or georotator stage, a transient propeller, and an ejector in a
binary system are discussed. Simple populational estimates favor the transient
propeller model.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Band-power reconstruction of the primordial fluctuation spectrum by the
  maximum likelihood reconstruction method
Authors: Ryo Nagata, Jun'ichi Yokoyama
Date: 2008-12-25T04:25:20Z
Abstract:   The primordial curvature fluctuation spectrum is reconstructed by the maximum
likelihood reconstruction method using the five-year Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe data of the cosmic microwave background temperature
anisotropy. We apply the covariance matrix analysis and decompose the
reconstructed spectrum into statistically independent band-powers. The
prominent peak off a simple power-law spectrum found in our previous analysis
turn out to be a $3.3\sigma$ deviation. From the statistics of primordial
spectra reconstructed from mock observations, the probability that a primordial
spectrum including such excess is realized in a power-law model is estimated to
be about 2%.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Model of Reconnection of Weakly Stochastic Magnetic Field and its
  Testing
Authors: A. Lazarian, E. Vishniac, G. Kowal
Date: 2008-12-24T22:59:53Z
Abstract:   Astrophysical fluids are generically turbulent, which means that frozen-in
magnetic fields are, at least, weakly stochastic. Therefore realistic studies
of astrophysical magnetic reconnection should include the effects of stochastic
magnetic field. In the paper we discuss and test numerically the Lazarian &
Vishniac (1999) model of magnetic field reconnection of weakly stochastic
fields. The turbulence in the model is assumed to be subAlfvenic, with the
magnetic field only slightly perturbed. The model predicts that the degree of
magnetic field stochasticity controls the reconnection rate and that the
reconnection can be fast independently on the presence or absence of anomalous
plasma effects. For testing of the model we use 3D MHD simulations. To measure
the reconnection rate we employ both the inflow of magnetic flux and a more
sophisticated measure that we introduce in the paper. Both measures of
reconnection provide consistent results. Our testing successfully reproduces
the dependences predicted by the model, including the variations of the
reconnection speed with the variations of the injection scale of turbulence
driving as well as the intensity of driving. We conclude that, while anomalous
and Hall-MHD effects in particular circumstances may be important for the
initiation of reconnection, the generic astrophysical reconnection is fast due
to turbulence, irrespectively of the microphysical plasma effects involved.
This conclusion justifies numerical modeling of many astrophysical
environments, e.g. interstellar medium, for which plasma-effect-based
collisionless reconnection is not applicable.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Grain alignment induced by radiative torques: effects of internal
  relaxation of energy and complex radiation fields
Authors: Thiem Hoang, Alex Lazarian
Date: 2008-12-24T21:02:35Z
Abstract:   Earlier studies of grain alignment dealt mostly with interstellar grains that
have strong internal relaxation of energy which aligns grain axis of maximum
moment of inertia with respect to grain's angular momentum. In this paper, we
study the alignment by radiative torques for large irregular grains, e.g.,
grains in accretion disks, for which internal relaxation is subdominant. We use
both numerical calculations and the analytical model of a helical grain
introduced by us earlier. We demonstrate that grains in such a regime exhibit
more complex dynamics. In particular, if initially the grain axis of maximum
moment of inertia makes a small angle with angular momentum, then radiative
torques can align the grain axis of maximum moment of inertia with angular
momentum, and both axis of maximum moment of inertia and angular momentum are
aligned with the magnetic field when attractors with high angular momentum
(high-J attractors) are available. For the alignment without high-J attractors,
beside the earlier studied attractors with low angular momentum (low-J
attractors), there appears new low-J attractors. The former and later cases
correspond to the alignment with long axes perpendicular and parallel to the
angular momentum, respectively. In addition, we study the alignment of grains
in the presence of strong internal relaxation, but induced not by a radiation
beam as in earlier studies, instead, induced by a complex radiation field, that
can be decomposed into dipole and quadrupole components. We find that in this
situation, the parameter space $q^{max}$, for the existence of high-$J$
attractors is more extended, which entails higher degrees of polarization
expected. Our obtained results are useful for modeling polarization arising
from aligned grains in molecular clouds and accretion disks.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Null geodesics and observational cosmology
Authors: A. A. Coley
Date: 2008-12-24T19:08:56Z
Abstract:   The Universe is not isotropic or spatially homogeneous on local scales. The
averaging of local inhomogeneities in general relativity can lead to
significant dynamical effects on the evolution of the Universe, and even if the
effects are at the 1% level they must be taken into account in a proper
interpretation of cosmological observations. We discuss the effects that
averaging (and inhomogeneities in general) can have on the dynamical evolution
of the Universe and the interpretation of cosmological data. All deductions
about cosmology are based on the paths of photons. We discuss some qualitative
aspects of the motion of photons in an averaged geometry, particularly within
the context of the luminosity distance-redshift relation in the simple case of
spherical symmetry.


Category: astro-ph
Title: On Dark Energy and Dark Matter (Part I)
Authors: Shlomo Barak, Elia M Leibowitz
Date: 2008-12-24T18:24:35Z
Abstract:   Phenomena currently attributed to Dark Energy (DE) and Dark Matter (DM) are
merely a result of the interplay between gravitational energy density,
generated by the contraction of space by matter, and the energy density of the
Cosmological Microwave Background (CMB), which causes space dilation. In the
universe, globally, the gravitational energy density equals the CMB energy
density. This leads to the derivation of the Hubble parameter, H, as a function
of the scale factor, a, the time, t, the redshift, z, and to the calculation of
its present value. It also leads to a new understanding of the cosmological
redshift and the Euclidian nature of the universe. From H(t) we conclude that
the time derivative of a is constant. This is in contrast to the consensus of
the last decade. This result is supported by the fit of our theoretically
derived flux from supernovae (SN) as a function of z, with observation. This
flux is derived based on our H(z) that determines DL, the Luminosity Distance.
We obtain this fit without any free parameters, whereas in current cosmology
this fit is obtained by using the dependent free parameters Omega_M and
Omega_Lambda.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Near-infrared bulge-disc correlations of lenticular galaxies
Authors: Sudhanshu Barway, Yogesh Wadadekar, Ajit K. Kembhavi, Y. D. Mayya
Date: 2008-12-24T18:13:02Z
Abstract:   We consider the luminosity and environmental dependence of structural
parameters of lenticular galaxies in the near-infrared K band. Using a
two-dimensional galaxy image decomposition technique, we extract bulge and disk
structural parameters for a sample of 36 lenticular galaxies observed by us in
the K band. By combining data from the literature for field and cluster
lenticulars with our data, we study correlations between parameters that
characterise the bulge and the disk as a function of luminosity and
environment. We find that scaling relations such as the Kormendy relation,
photometric plane and other correlations involving bulge and disk parameters
show a luminosity dependence. This dependence can be explained in terms of
galaxy formation models in which faint lenticulars (M_T > -24.5) formed via
secular formation processes that likely formed the pseudobulges of late-type
disk galaxies, while brighter lenticulars (M_T < -24.5) formed through a
different formation mechanism most likely involving major mergers. On probing
variations in lenticular properties as a function of environment, we find that
faint cluster lenticulars show systematic differences with respect to faint
field lenticulars. These differences support the idea that the bulge and disk
components fade after the galaxy falls into a cluster, while simultaneously
undergoing a transformation from spiral to lenticular morphologies.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Is the PAMELA Positron Excess Winos?
Authors: Phill Grajek, Gordon Kane, Dan Phalen, Aaron Pierce, Scott Watson
Date: 2008-12-24T17:23:12Z
Abstract:   Recently the PAMELA satellite-based experiment reported an excess of galactic
positrons that could be a signal of annihilating dark matter. The PAMELA data
may admit an interpretation as a signal from a wino-like LSP of mass about 200
GeV, normalized to the local relic density, and annihilating mainly into
W-bosons. This possibility requires the current conventional estimate for the
energy loss rate of positrons be too large by roughly a factor of five. Data
from anti-protons and gamma rays also provide tension with this interpretation,
but there are significant astrophysical uncertainties associated with their
propagation. It is not unreasonable to take this well-motivated candidate
seriously, at present, in part because it can be tested in several ways soon.
The forthcoming PAMELA data on higher energy positrons and the FGST (formerly
GLAST) data, should provide important clues as to whether this scenario is
correct. If correct, the wino interpretation implies a cosmological history in
which the dark matter does not originate in thermal equilibrium.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Do non-relativistic neutrinos constitute the dark matter?
Authors: Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen
Date: 2008-12-24T17:14:43Z
Abstract:   The dark matter of the Abell 1689 galaxy cluster is modeled by thermal,
non-relativistic gravitating fermions and its galaxies and X-ray gas by
isothermal distributions. A fit yields a mass of $h_{70}^{1/2}(12/{\overline
g})^{1/4}$1.445 $(30)$ eV. A dark matter fraction
$\Omega_\nu=h_{70}^{-3/2}0.1893$ $(39)$ occurs for ${\overline g}=12$ degrees
of freedom, i. e., for 3 families of left plus right handed neutrinos with
masses $\approx 2^{3/4}G_F^{1/2}m_e^2$. Given a temperature of 0.045 K and a de
Broglie length of 0.20 mm, they establish a quantum structure of several
million light years across, the largest known in the Universe. The virial
$\alpha$-particle temperature of $9.9\pm1.1$ keV$/k_B$ coincides with the
average one of X-rays. The results are compatible with neutrino genesis,
nucleosynthesis and free streaming. The neutrinos condense on the cluster at
redshift $z\sim 28$, thereby causing reionization of the intracluster gas
without assistance of heavy stars. The baryons are poor tracers of the dark
matter density.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Explaining the Orbits of the Galactic Center S-Stars
Authors: David Merritt, Alessia Gualandris, Seppo Mikkola
Date: 2008-12-24T16:31:22Z
Abstract:   The young stars near the supermassive black hole at the galactic center
follow orbits that are nearly random in orientation and that have an
approximately thermal distribution of eccentricities, N(e) ~ e. We show that
both of these properties are a natural consequence of a few million years'
interaction with an intermediate-mass black hole (IBH), if the latter's orbit
is mildly eccentric and if its mass exceeds approximately 1500 solar masses.
Producing the most tightly-bound S-stars requires an IBH orbit with periastron
distance less than about 10 mpc. Our results provide support for a model in
which the young stars are carried to the galactic center while bound to an IBH,
and are consistent with the hypothesis that an IBH may still be orbiting within
the nuclear star cluster.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The ACS Survey of Galactic Globular Clusters. VII. Relative Ages
Authors: Antonio Marin-Franch, Antonio Aparicio, Giampaolo Piotto, Alfred Rosenberg, Brian Chaboyer, Ata Sarajedini, Michael Siegel, Jay Anderson, Luigi R. Bedin, Aaron Dotter, Maren Hempel, Ivan King, Steven Majewski, Antonino P. Milone, Nathaniel Paust, I. Neill Reid
Date: 2008-12-24T15:09:09Z
Abstract:   The ACS Survey of Galactic Globular Clusters is a Hubble Space Telescope
(HST) Treasury program designed to provide a new large, deep and homogeneous
photometric database. Based on observations from this program, we have measured
precise relative ages for a sample of 64 Galactic globular clusters by
comparing the relative position of the clusters' main sequence turn offs, using
main-sequence fitting to cross-compare clusters within the sample. This method
provides relative ages to a formal precision of 2-7%. We demonstrate that the
calculated relative ages are independent of the choice of theoretical model. We
find that the Galactic globular cluster sample can be divided into two groups
-- a population of old clusters with an age dispersion of ~5% and no
age-metallicity relation, and a group of younger clusters with an
age-metallicity relation similar to that of the globular clusters associated
with the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy.
  These results are consistent with the Milky Way halo having formed in two
phases or processes. The first one would be compatible with a rapid (<0.8 Gyr)
assembling process of the halo, in which the clusters in the old group were
formed. Also these clusters could have been formed before reionization in dwarf
galaxies that would later merge to build the Milky Way halo as predicted by
Lambda-CDM cosmology. However, the galactocentric metallicity gradient shown by
these clusters seems difficult to reconcile with the latter. As for the younger
clusters, it is very tempting to argue that their origin is related to their
formation within Milky Way satellite galaxies that were later accreted, but the
origin of the age-metallicity relation remains unclear.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Nonlinear Density Fluctuation Field Theory for Large Scale Structure
Authors: Yang Zhang, Haixing Miao
Date: 2008-12-24T14:20:28Z
Abstract:   We develop the effective field theory of density fluctuations for a Newtonian
self-gravitating N-body system in quasi-equilibrium, apply it to a homogeneous
universe with small density fluctuations. Keeping the density fluctuation up to
the second order, we obtain the nonlinear field equation of the 2-pt
correlation \xi(r), which contains the 3-pt correlation and formal ultra-violet
divergences. By the Groth-Peebles hierarchical ansatz and the mass
renormalization, the equation becomes closed with two new terms beyond the
Gaussian approximation, and their coefficients are taken as parameters. The
analytic solution is obtained in terms of the hypergeometric functions, which
is checked numerically. With one single set of fixed two parameters, the
correlation $\xi(r)$ and the corresponding power spectrum P(k) match
simultaneously the results from all the major surveys, such as APM, SDSS,
2dfGRS, and REFLEX. The model gives a unifying understanding of several
seemingly unrelated features of large scale structure from a field-theoretical
perspective. The theory is worthy to be extended to study the evolution effects
in an expanding universe.


Category: astro-ph
Title: New BVRI photometry results on KBOs from the ESO VLT
Authors: P. Santos-Sanz, J. L. Ortiz, L. Barrera, H. Boehnhardt
Date: 2008-12-24T12:52:29Z
Abstract:   Photometric surveys of transNeptunian objects (TNOs) and Centaurs have
suggested possible correlations between some orbital parameters and surface
colors of classical objects, scattered disk objects (SDOs), and Centaurs.
However, larger sample sizes are needed in order to corroborate or rule out the
possible correlations and find some possible new ones. We use VLT-FORS images
through BVRI filters of 32 Kuiper Belt Objects (KBOs) and obtain their colors
after proper reduction and calibration. We study the possible correlations
merging these new measurements with the VLT published results from the ESO
large program and with the latest published results of the Meudon Multicolor
Survey via non-parametric statistical tests. We obtain a large dataset of 116
objects (classical, SDOs and Centaurs) and, in addition to confirming most of
the correlations and conclusions reached in the literature, some possible new
correlations are found. The most interesting ones are some correlations of
color vs. orbital parameters for the different dynamical groups. We find that
some correlations in the classical group, as well as the (dynamically) cold and
hot subgroups depend on the size of the objects. As a by-product of our study,
we were able to identify new candidates for light curve studies and found that
~55% of the objects showed variability above 0.15 mags. This is a higher value
than what is found in other studies. Since our sample contains smaller objects
than samples from other studies, this result might be an indication that the
smaller TNOs are more elongated than the larger ones.


Category: astro-ph
Title: High Inclination Planets in Multistellar Systems
Authors: P. E. Verrier, N. W. Evans
Date: 2008-12-24T12:31:05Z
Abstract:   The Kozai mechanism often destabilises high inclination orbits. It couples
changes in the eccentricity and inclination, and drives high inclination,
circular orbits to low inclination, eccentric orbits. In a recent study of the
dynamics of planetesimals in the quadruple star system HD98800 (Verrier & Evans
2008), there were significant numbers of stable particles in circumbinary polar
orbits about the inner binary pair which are apparently able to evade the Kozai
instability. Here, we isolate this feature and investigate the dynamics through
numerical and analytical models. The results show that the Kozai mechanism of
the outer star is disrupted by a nodal libration induced by the inner binary
pair on a shorter timescale. By empirically modelling the period of the
libration, a criteria for determining the high inclination stability limits in
general triple systems is derived. The nodal libration feature is interesting
and, although effecting inclination and node only, shows many parallels to the
Kozai mechanism. This raises the possibility that high inclination planets and
asteroids may be able to survive in multistellar systems.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Nodeless differentially rotational Alfvén oscillations of crustal
  solid-state plasma in quaking neutron star
Authors: S. I. Bastrukov, H. -K. Chang, I. V. Molodtsova, J. Takata
Date: 2008-12-24T12:09:46Z
Abstract:   The two-component, core-crust, model of a neutron star with homogenous
internal and dipolar external magnetic field is studied responding to
quake-induced perturbation by substantially nodeless differentially rotational
Alfv\'en oscillations of the perfectly conducting crustal matter about axis of
fossil magnetic field frozen in the immobile core. The energy variational
method of the magneto-solid-mechanical theory of a viscoelastic perfectly
conducting medium pervaded by magnetic field is utilized to compute the
frequency and lifetime of nodeless torsional vibrations of crustal solid-state
plasma about the dipole magnetic-moment axis of the star. It is found that
obtained two-parametric spectral formula for the frequency of this toroidal
Alfven mode provides fairly accurate account of rapid oscillations of the X-ray
flux during the flare of SGR 1806-20 and SGR 1900+14, supporting the
investigated conjecture that these quasi-periodic oscillations owe its origin
to axisymmetric torsional oscillations predominately driven by Lorentz force of
magnetic field stresses in the finite-depth crustal region of the above
magnetars.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Orbital Phase Spectroscopy of four High Mass X-ray Binary Pulsars to
  Study the Stellar Wind of the Companion
Authors: Sachindra Naik, Uddipan Mukherjee, Biswajit Paul, C. S. Choi
Date: 2008-12-24T11:02:46Z
Abstract:   Our work focuses on a comprehensive orbital phase dependent spectroscopy of
the four High Mass X-ray Binary Pulsars (HMXBPs) 4U 1538-52, GX 301-2, OAO
1657-415 & Vela X-1. We hereby report the measurements of the variation of the
absorption column density and iron-line flux along with other spectral
parameters over the binary orbit for the above-mentioned HMXBPs in elliptical
orbits, as observed with the Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) and the
BeppoSAX satellites. A spherically symmetric wind profile was used as a model
to compare the observed column density variations. Out of the four pulsars,
only in 4U 1538-52, we find the model having a reasonable corroboration with
the observations, whereas in the remaining three the stellar wind seems to be
clumpy and a smooth symmetric stellar wind model appears to be quite inadequate
in explaining the data. Moreover, in GX 301-2, neither the presence of a disk
nor a gas stream from the companion was validated. Furthermore, the spectral
results obtained in the case of OAO 1657-415 & Vela X-1 were more or less
similar to that of GX 301-2.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Relaxing the Cosmological Constraints on Unparticle Dark Component
Authors: Hao Wei
Date: 2008-12-24T10:10:07Z
Abstract:   Unparticle physics has been an active field since the seminal work of Georgi.
Recently, many constraints on unparticles from various observations have been
considered in the literature. In particular, the cosmological constraints on
the unparticle dark component put it in a serious situation. In this work, we
try to find a way out of this serious situation, by including the possible
interaction between dark energy and the unparticle dark component.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Holography, UV/IR Relation, Causal Entropy Bound and Dark Energy
Authors: Rong-Gen Cai, Bin Hu, Yi Zhang
Date: 2008-12-24T08:49:47Z
Abstract:   The constraint on the total energy in a given spatial region is given from
holography by the mass of a black hole which just fits in that region, which
leads to an UV/IR relation: the maximal energy density in that region is
proportional to $M_p^2/L^2$, where $M_p$ is the Planck mass and $L$ is the
spatial scale of that region under consideration. Assuming the maximal black
hole in the universe is formed through gravitational collapse of perturbations
in the universe, then the "Jeans" scale of the perturbations gives a causal
connection scale $R_{\rm CC}$. For gravitational perturbations, $R^{-2}_{\rm
CC}={\rm Max}(\dot H+2H^2, -\dot H)$ for a flat universe. We study the
cosmological dynamics of the corresponding vacuum energy density by choosing
the causal connection scale as the IR cutoff in the UV/IR relation, in the
cases of the vacuum energy density as an independently conserved energy
component and an effective dynamical cosmological constant, respectively. It
turns out that only the case with the choice $R_{\rm CC}^{-2}= \dot H +2H^2$,
could be consistent with the current cosmological observations when the vacuum
density appears as an independently conserved energy component. In this case,
the model is called holographic Ricci scalar dark energy model in the
literature.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Probing Dark Energy at Galactic and Cluster Scales
Authors: David F. Mota
Date: 2008-12-24T06:48:31Z
Abstract:   We investigate dark matter halo properties as a function of a time--varying
dark energy equation of state. The dynamics of the collapse of the halo is
governed by the form of the quintessence potential, the time evolution of its
equation of state, the initial conditions of the field and its homogeneity
nature in the highly non--linear regime. These have a direct impact on the
turnaround, virialisation and collapse times, altering in consequence the
non--linear density contrast and virial radius. We compute halo concentrations
using the Eke, Navarro & Steinmetz algorithm, examining two extreme scenarios:
first, we assume that the quintessence field does not exhibit fluctuations on
cluster scales and below - homogeneous fluid; second, we assume that the field
inside the overdensity collapses along with the dark matter - inhomogeneous
fluid. The Eke, Navarro & Steinmetz prescription reveals, in general, higher
halo concentrations in inhomogeneous dark energy models than in their
homogeneous equivalents. Halo concentrations appear to be controlled by both
changes in formation epochs of the halo cores as well as by differing
virialisation overdensities. We derive physical halo properties in all models
and discuss their observational implications. We examine two possible methods
for comparing observations with theoretical predictions. The first method works
on galaxy cluster scales and consists of fitting the observed X-ray cluster gas
density distributions to those predicted for an NFW profile. The second method
works on galaxy scales and involves the observational measurement of the
so--called central density parameter.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Strange Quark stars: Observations & Speculations
Authors: Renxin Xu
Date: 2008-12-24T06:16:09Z
Abstract:   Two kinds of difficulties have challenged the physics community for many
years: (1) knowing nature's building blocks (particle physics) and (2)
understanding interacting many-body systems (many-body physics). Both of them
exist in the research of quark matter and compact stars. This paper addresses
the possibility that quark clustering, rather than a color super-conducting
state, could occur in cold quark matter at realistic baryon densities of
compact stars, since a weakly coupling treatment of the interaction between
quarks might not be reliable. Cold quark matter is conjectured to be in a solid
state if thermal kinematic energy is much lower than the interaction energy of
quark clusters. Different manifestations of pulsar-like compact stars are
discussed, as well as modeled in a regime of solid quark stars.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Effects of Minor Mergers on Coalescence of a Supermassive Black Hole
  Binary
Authors: Hidenori Matsui, Asao Habe
Date: 2008-12-24T05:08:13Z
Abstract:   We study the possibility that minor mergers resolve the loss cone depletion
problem, which is the difficulty occured in the coalescence process of the
supermassive black hole (SMBH) binary, by performing numerical simulations with
a highly accurate $N$-body code. We show that the minor merger of a dwarf
galaxy disturbs stellar orbits in the galactic central region of the host
galaxy where the loss cone depletion is already caused by the SMBH binary. The
disturbed stars are supplied into the loss cone. Stars of the dwarf galaxy are
also supplied into the loss cone. The gravitational interactions between the
SMBH binary and these stars become very effective. The gravitational
interaction decreases the binding energy of the SMBH binary effectively. As a
result, the shrink of the separation of the SMBH binary is accelerated. Our
numerical results strongly suggest that the minor mergers are one of the
important processes to reduce the coalescence time of the SMBH binary much less
than the Hubble time.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Intensity Distribution and Luminosity Function of the Swift Gamma-Ray
  Bursts
Authors: Xinyu Dai
Date: 2008-12-24T00:51:34Z
Abstract:   Using the sample of long Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) detected by Swift-BAT before
June 2007, we measure the cumulative distribution of the peak photon fluxes
(log N - log P) of the Swift bursts. Compared with the BATSE sample, we find
that the two distributions are consistent after correcting the band pass
difference, suggesting that the two instruments are sampling the same
population of bursts. We also compare the log N - log P distributions for
sub-samples of the Swift bursts, and find evidence for a deficit (99.75%
confident) of dark bursts without optical counterparts at high peak flux
levels, suggesting different redshift or Gamma-ray luminosity distributions for
these bursts. The consistency between the log N - log P distributions for the
optically detected bursts with and without redshift measurements indicates that
the current sample of the Swift bursts with redshift measurements, although
selected heterogeneously, represents a fair sample of the non-dark bursts. We
calculate the luminosity functions of this sample in two redshift bins (z<1 and
z>1), and find a broken power-law is needed to fit the low redshift bin, where
dN/dL \propto L^{-1.27\pm0.06} for high luminosities (L_{peak} > 5e48 erg/s)
and dN/dL \propto L^{-2.3\pm0.3} at for low luminosities, confirming the
results of several studies for a population of low luminosity GRBs.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Small-scale solar magnetic fields
Authors: A. G. de Wijn, J. O. Stenflo, S. K. Solanki, S. Tsuneta
Date: 2008-12-24T00:50:57Z
Abstract:   As we resolve ever smaller structures in the solar atmosphere, it has become
clear that magnetism is an important component of those small structures.
Small-scale magnetism holds the key to many poorly understood facets of solar
magnetism on all scales, such as the existence of a local dynamo, chromospheric
heating, and flux emergence, to name a few. Here, we review our knowledge of
small-scale photospheric fields, with particular emphasis on quiet-sun field,
and discuss the implications of several results obtained recently using new
instruments, as well as future prospects in this field of research.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Dissecting cosmic-ray electron-positron data with Occam's Razor: the
  role of known Pulsars
Authors: Stefano Profumo
Date: 2008-12-23T22:07:34Z
Abstract:   We argue that both the positron fraction measured by PAMELA and the peculiar
spectral features reported in the total electron-positron (e+e-) flux measured
by ATIC have a very natural explanation in electron-positron pairs produced by
nearby pulsars. While this possibility was pointed out a long time ago, the
greatly improved quality of current data potentially allow to reverse-engineer
the problem: given the regions of pulsar parameter space favored by PAMELA and
by ATIC, are there known pulsars that explain the data with reasonable
assumptions on the injected e+e- pairs? In the context of simple benchmark
models for estimating the e+e- output, we consider all known pulsars, as listed
in the most complete available catalogue. We find that it is unlikely that a
single pulsar be responsible for both the PAMELA e+ fraction anomaly and for
the ATIC excess, although two single sources are in principle enough to explain
both experimental results. The PAMELA excess e+ likely come from a set of
mature pulsars (age ~ 10^6 yr), with a distance of 0.8-1 kpc, or from a single,
younger and closer source like Geminga. The ATIC data require a larger (and
less plausible) energy output, and favor an origin associated to powerful, more
distant (1-2 kpc) and younger (age ~ 10^5$ yr) pulsars. We list several
candidate pulsars that can individually or coherently contribute to explain the
PAMELA and ATIC data. Although generally suppressed, we find that the
contribution of pulsars more distant than 1-2 kpc could contribute for the ATIC
excess. Finally, we stress the multi-faceted and decisive role that Fermi-LAT
will play in the very near future by (1) providing an exquisite measurement of
the e+e- flux, (2) unveiling the existence of as yet undetected pulsars, and
(3) searching for anisotropies in the arrival direction of high-energy e+e-.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Black Holes Admitting Strong Resonant Phenomena
Authors: Zdenek Stuchlik, Andrea Kotrlova, Gabriel Torok
Date: 2008-12-23T20:31:44Z
Abstract:   High-frequency twin peak quasiperiodic oscillations (QPOs) are observed in
four microquasars, i.e., Galactic black hole binary systems, with frequency
ratio very close to 3:2. In the microquasar GRS 1915+105, the structure of QPOs
exhibits additional frequencies, and more than two frequencies are observed in
the Galaxy nuclei Sgr A*, or in some extragalactic sources (NGC 4051,
MCG-6-30-15 and NGC 5408 X-1). The observed QPOs can be explained by a variety
of the orbital resonance model versions assuming resonance of oscillations with
the Keplerian frequency or the vertical epicyclic frequency, and the radial
epicyclic frequency, or some combinations of these frequencies. Generally,
different resonances could arise at different radii of an accretion disc.
However, we have shown that for special values of dimensionless black hole spin
strong resonant phenomena could occur when different resonances can be excited
at the same radius, as cooperative phenomena between the resonances may work in
such situations. The special values of black hole spin are determined for
triple frequency ratio sets \nu_{K} : \nu_{\theta} : \nu_{r} = s:t:u with s, t,
u being small integers. The most promising example of such a special situation
arises for black holes with extraordinary resonant spin a = 0.983 at the radius
r = 2.395 M, where \nu_{K} : \nu_{\theta} : \nu_{r} = 3:2:1. We also predict
that when combinations of the orbital frequencies are allowed, QPOs with four
frequency ratio set 4:3:2:1 could be observed in the field of black holes with
a = 0.866, 0.882 and 0.962. Assuming the extraordinary resonant spin a = 0.983
in Sgr A*, its QPOs with observed frequency ratio very close to 3:2:1 imply the
black hole mass in the interval 4.3 x 10^6 M_sun < M < 5.4 x 10^6 M_sun, in
agreement with estimates given by other, independent, observations.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Dynamical and thermal evolution of the quark-nova ejecta
Authors: Rachid Ouyed, Denis Leahy
Date: 2008-12-23T19:01:47Z
Abstract:   We explore the dynamical and thermal evolution of the ejected neutron star
crust in a Quark-Nova explosion. Typical explosion energies and ejected crust
masses result in relativistic ejection with Lorentz factors of a few to a few
hundred. The ejecta undergoes a rapid cooling and stretching resulting in break
up into many small pieces (clumps) when the ejecta is only ~ 100 km from the
explosion site. The number and size of the clumps depends on whether the
breakup occurs in the liquid or solid phase. For these two cases, the clump
number is ~ 10^3 (liquid phase) or ~ 10^7 (solid phase) and, at break up, are
spherical (size ~ 10^4 cm; liquid phase) or needle shaped (~ 10^4x10^2 cm;
solid phase).


Category: astro-ph
Title: Shape and kinematics of elliptical galaxies: evolution due to merging at
  z < 1.5
Authors: A. César González-García, José Oñorbe, Rosa Domínguez-Tenreiro, M. Ángeles Gómez-Flechoso
Date: 2008-12-23T18:13:16Z
Abstract:   Aims:In this study we investigate the evolution of shape and kinematics of
elliptical galaxies in a cosmological framework.
  Methods: We use a set of hydrodynamic, self-consistent simulations operating
in the context of a concordance cosmological model where relaxed
elliptical-like objects (ELOs) were identified at redshifts z=0, z=0.5, z=1 and
z=1.5.
  Results: The population of elliptical systems analysed here present a
systematic change through time, i.e. evolution, by becoming rounder in general
at z=0 and, at the same time more velocity dispersion supported. This is found
to be primarily due to major dry mergers where only a modest amount of angular
momentum is involved into the merger event. Despite the general trend, in a
significant amount of cases the merger event involves a higher specific angular
momentum, which in general causes the system to acquire a higher rotational
support and/or a more oblate shape. These evolutionary patterns are still
present when we study our systems in projection, mimicking real observations,
and thus they should become apparent in future observations.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The very short supersoft X-ray state of the classical nova M31N 2007-11a
Authors: M. Henze, W. Pietsch, G. Sala, M. Della Valle, M. Hernanz, J. Greiner, V. Burwitz, M. J. Freyberg, F. Haberl, D. H. Hartmann, P. Milne, G. G. Williams
Date: 2008-12-23T16:25:44Z
Abstract:   Short supersoft X-ray source (SSS) states (durations < 100 days) of classical
novae (CNe) indicate massive white dwarfs that are candidate progenitors of
supernovae type Ia. We carry out a dedicated optical and X-ray monitoring
program of CNe in the bulge of M 31. We discovered M31N 2007-11a and determined
its optical and X-ray light curve. We used the robotic Super-LOTIS telescope to
obtain the optical data and XMM-Newton and Chandra observations to discover an
X-ray counterpart to that nova. Nova M31N 2007-11a is a very fast CN,
exhibiting a very short SSS state with an appearance time of 6-16 days after
outburst and a turn-off time of 45-58 days after outburst. The optical and
X-ray light curves of M31N 2007-11a suggest a binary containing a white dwarf
with a mass greater than one solar mass.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Recoil velocity at 2PN order for spinning black hole binaries
Authors: Etienne Racine, Alessandra Buonanno, Lawrence E. Kidder
Date: 2008-12-23T16:00:05Z
Abstract:   We compute the flux of linear momentum carried by gravitational waves emitted
from spinning binary black holes at 2PN order for generic orbits. In particular
we provide explicit expressions of three new types of terms, namely
next-to-leading order spin-orbit terms at 1.5 PN order, spin-orbit tail terms
at 2PN order, and spin-spin terms at 2PN order. Restricting ourselves to
quasi-circular orbits, we integrate the linear momentum flux over time to
obtain the recoil velocity as function of orbital frequency. We find that in
the so-called superkick configuration the higher-order spin corrections can
increase the recoil velocity up to about a factor 3 with respect to the
leading-order PN prediction. Furthermore, we provide expressions valid for
generic orbits, and accurate at 2PN order, for the energy and angular momentum
carried by gravitational waves emitted from spinning binary black holes.
Specializing to quasi-circular orbits we compute the spin-spin terms at 2PN
order in the expression for the evolution of the orbital frequency and found
agreement with Mik\'oczi, Vas\'uth and Gergely. We also verified that in the
limit of extreme mass ratio our expressions for the energy and angular momentum
fluxes match the ones of Tagoshi, Shibata, Tanaka and Sasaki obtained in the
context of black hole perturbation theory.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A model for the Z-track phenomenon in GX 5-1 and observational evidence
  for the physical origins of the kHz QPO
Authors: N. K. Jackson, M. J. Church, M. Balucinska-Church
Date: 2008-12-23T15:56:15Z
Abstract:   We present results of a combined investigation of the spectral and kHz QPO
evolution around the Z-track in GX 5-1 based on high-quality RXTE data. The
Extended ADC emission model provides very good fits to the spectra, the results
pointing clearly to a model for the nature of the Z-track, in agreement with
previous results for the similar source GX 340+0. In this model, at the soft
apex of the Z-track, the mass accretion rate Mdot is minimum and the neutron
star has its lowest temperature; but as the source moves along the normal
branch, the luminosity of the Comptonized emission increases, indicating that
Mdot increases and the neutron star gets hotter. The measured flux f of the
neutron star emission increases by a factor of ten becoming super-Eddington,
and we propose that this disrupts the inner disk so forming jets. In flaring,
the luminosity of the dominant Comptonized emission from the ADC is constant,
while the neutron star emission increases, and we propose for the first time
that flaring consists of unstable nuclear burning on the neutron star, and the
measured mass accretion rate per unit area mdot at the onset of flaring agrees
well with the theoretical critical value at which burning becomes unstable.
There is a striking correlation between the frequencies of the kHz QPO and the
ratio of the flux to the Eddington value: f/f_Edd, suggesting an explanation of
the higher frequency QPO and of its variation along the Z-track. It is well
known that a Keplerian orbit in the disk at this frequency corresponds to a
position some distance from the neutron star; we propose that the oscillation
always occurs at the inner disk edge, which moves radially outwards on the
upper normal and horizontal branches as the measured increasing radiation
pressure increasingly disrupts the inner disk.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Abell 851 and the Role of Starbursts in Cluster Galaxy Evolution
Authors: A. Oemler Jr, A. Dressler, D. Kelson, J. Rigby, B. M. Poggianti, J. Fritz, G. Morrison, I. Smail
Date: 2008-12-23T15:32:37Z
Abstract:   We use extensive new observations of the very rich z ~ 0.4 cluster of
galaxies A851 to examine the nature and origin of starburst galaxies in
intermediate-redshift clusters. New HST observations, Spitzer photometry and
ground-based spectroscopy cover most of a region of the cluster about 10 arcmin
across, corresponding to a clustercentric radial distance of about 1.6 Mpc.
This spatial coverage allows us to confirm the existence of a
morphology-density relation within this cluster, and to identify several large,
presumably infalling, subsystems. We confirm our previous conclusion that a
very large fraction of the starforming galaxies in A851 have recently undergone
starbursts. We argue that starbursts are mostly confined to two kinds of sites:
infalling groups and the cluster center. At the cluster center it appears that
infalling galaxies are undergoing major mergers, resulting in starbursts whose
optical emission lines are completely buried beneath dust. The aftermath of
this process appears to be proto-S0 galaxies devoid of star formation. In
contrast, major mergers do not appear to be the cause of most of the starbursts
in infalling groups, and fewer of these events result in the transformation of
the galaxy into an S0. Some recent theoretical work provides possible
explanations for these two distinct processes, but it is not clear whether they
can operate with the very high efficiency needed to account for the very large
starburst rate observed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Magnetic Sensitivity of the Second Solar Spectrum
Authors: J. Trujillo Bueno
Date: 2008-12-23T14:35:13Z
Abstract:   This paper reviews some of the developments that over the last 10 years have
allowed us to go from deciphering the physical origin of several of the
enigmatic features of the second solar spectrum to discovering unknown aspects
of the Sun's hidden magnetism via sophisticated radiative transfer modeling.
The second solar spectrum is the observational signature of radiatively induced
quantum coherences in the atoms and molecules of the solar atmosphere. Magnetic
fields produce partial decoherence via the Hanle effect, giving rise to
fascinating observable effects in the emergent spectral line polarization.
Interestingly, these effects allow us to "see" magnetic fields to which the
Zeeman effect is blind within the limitations of the available instrumentation.
In the coming years, the physical interpretation of observations of the
spectral line polarization resulting from the joint action of the Hanle and
Zeeman effects might lead to a new revolution in our empirical understanding of
solar magnetic fields.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Testing the predictions of the cold dark matter model for the sizes,
  colours, morphologies and luminosities of galaxies with the SDSS
Authors: J. E. Gonzalez, C. G. Lacey, C. M. Baugh, C. S. Frenk, A. J. Benson
Date: 2008-12-23T14:33:29Z
Abstract:   The huge size and uniformity of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey makes possible
an exacting test of current models of galaxy formation. We compare the
predictions of the GALFORM semi-analytical galaxy formation model for the
luminosities, morphologies, colours and scale-lengths of local galaxies.
GALFORM models the luminosity and size of the disk and bulge components of a
galaxy, and so we can compute quantities which can be compared directly with
SDSS observations, such as the Petrosian magnitude and the Sersic index. We
test the predictions of two published models set in the cold dark matter
cosmology: the Baugh et al. (2005) model, which assumes a top-heavy initial
mass function (IMF) in starbursts and superwind feedback, and the Bower et al.
(2006) model, which uses AGN feedback and a standard IMF. The Bower et al model
better reproduces the overall shape of the luminosity function, the
morphology-luminosity relation and the colour bimodality observed in the SDSS
data, but gives a poor match to the size-luminosity relation. The \Baugh et al.
model successfully predicts the size-luminosity relation for late-type
galaxies. Both models fail to reproduce the sizes of bright early-type
galaxies. These problems highlight the need to understand better both the role
of feedback processes in determining galaxy sizes, in particular the treatment
of the angular momentum of gas reheated by supernovae, and the sizes of the
stellar spheroids formed by galaxy mergers and disk instabilities.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Neutron specific heat in the crust of neutron stars from the nuclear
  band theory
Authors: Nicolas Chamel, Jérôme Margueron, Elias Khan
Date: 2008-12-23T13:01:07Z
Abstract:   The inner crust of neutron stars, formed of a crystal lattice of uclear
clusters immersed in a sea of unbound neutrons, may be the nique example of
periodic nuclear systems. We have calculated the neutron specific heat in the
shallow part of the crust using the band theory of solids with Skyrme
nucleon-nucleon interactions. We have also tested the validity of various
approximations. We have found that the neutron specific heat is well described
by that of a Fermi gas, while the motion of the unbound neutrons is strongly
affected by the nuclear lattice. These apparently contradictory results are
explained by the particular properties of the neutron Fermi surface.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Synchronization mechanism of sharp edges in rings of Saturn
Authors: D. L. Shepelyansky, A. S. Pikovsky, J. Schmidt, F. Spahn
Date: 2008-12-23T11:31:08Z
Abstract:   We propose a new mechanism which explains the existence of enormously sharp
edges in the rings of Saturn. This mechanism is based on the synchronization
phenomenon due to which the epicycle rotational phases of particles in the
ring, under certain conditions, become synchronized with the phase of external
satellite, e.g. with the phase of Mimas in the case of the outer B ring edge.
This synchronization eliminates collisions between particles and suppress the
diffusion induced by collisions by orders of magnitude. The minimum of the
diffusion is reached at the center of the synchronization regime corresponding
to the ratio 2:1 between the orbital frequency at the edge of B ring and the
orbital frequency of Mimas. The synchronization theory gives the sharpness of
the edge in few tens of meters that is in agreement with available
observations.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Disentangling age and metallicity in distant unresolved stellar systems
Authors: M. Cantiello, E. Brocato, G. Raimondo
Date: 2008-12-23T11:09:28Z
Abstract:   We present some results of an observational and theoretical study on
unresolved stellar systems based on the Surface Brightness Fluctuations (SBF)
technique. It is shown that SBF magnitudes are a valuable tracer of stellar
population properties, and a reliable distance indicator. SBF magnitudes,
SBF-colors, and SBF-gradients can help to constrain within relatively narrow
limits the metallicity and age of the dominant stellar component in distant
stellar systems, especially if coupled with other spectro-photometric
indicators.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Gravitational wave background as a probe of the primordial black hole
  abundance
Authors: Ryo Saito, Jun'ichi Yokoyama
Date: 2008-12-23T10:05:57Z
Abstract:   Formation of significant number of primordial black holes (PBHs) is realized
if and only if primordial density fluctuations have a large amplitude, which
means that tensor perturbations generated from these scalar perturbations as a
second order effect are also large and comparable to the observational data. We
show that pulsar timing observation could find/rule out PBHs with \sim 10^2
M_solar which are considered as a candidate of intermediate-mass black holes
and that PBHs with mass range 10^{20-26} g, which serves as a candidate of dark
matter, may be probed by future space-based laser interferometers and atomic
interferometers.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Role of Massive Agb Stars in the Early Solar System Composition
Authors: Josep M. Trigo-Rodriguez, Domingo Anibal Garcia-Hernandez, Maria Lugaro, Amanda I. Karakas, M. van Raai, Pedro Garcia Lario, Arturo Manchado
Date: 2008-12-23T09:59:25Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate that a massive asymptotic giant branch (AGB) star is a good
candidate as the main source of short-lived radionuclides in the early solar
system. Recent identification of massive (4-8 solar masses) AGB stars in the
Galaxy, which are both lithium- and rubidium-rich, demonstrates that these
stars experience proton captures at the base of the convective envelope (hot
bottom burning), together with high-neutron density nucleosynthesis with 22Ne
as a neutron source in the He shell and efficient dredge-up of the processed
material. A model of a 6.5 solar masses star of solar metallicity can
simultaneously match the abundances of 26Al, 41Ca, 60Fe, and 107Pd inferred to
have been present in the solar nebula by using a dilution factor of 1 part of
AGB material per 300 parts of original solar nebula material, and taking into
account a time interval between injection of the short-lived nuclides and
consolidation of the first meteorites equal to 0.53 Myr. Such a polluting
source does not overproduce 53Mn, as supernova models do, and only marginally
affects isotopic ratios of stable elements. It is usually argued that it is
unlikely that the short-lived radionuclides in the early solar system came from
an AGB star because these stars are rarely found in star forming regions,
however, we think that further interdisciplinary studies are needed to address
the fundamental problem of the birth of our solar system.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Two more disk galaxies with global gas counterrotation
Authors: O. K. Sil'chenko, A. V. Moiseev, V. L. Afanasiev
Date: 2008-12-23T08:11:53Z
Abstract:   We report a discovery of extended counterrotating gaseous disks in early-type
disk galaxies NGC 2551 and NGC 5631. To find them, we have undertaken complex
spectral observations including integral-field spectroscopy for the central
parts of the galaxies and long-slit deep spectroscopy to probe the external
parts. The line-of-sight velocity fields have been constructed and compared to
the photometric structure of the galaxies. As a result, we have revealed
full-size counterrotating gaseous disks, the one coplanar to the stellar disk
in NGC 2551 and the other inclined to the main stellar disk in NGC 5631. We
suggest that we observe the early stages of minor-merger events which may be
two different stages of the process of lenticular galaxy formation in rather
sparse environments.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Equation of state of classical Coulomb plasma mixtures
Authors: A. Y. Potekhin, G. Chabrier, F. J. Rogers
Date: 2008-12-23T07:38:44Z
Abstract:   We develop analytic approximations of thermodynamic functions of fully
ionized nonideal electron-ion plasma mixtures. In the regime of strong Coulomb
coupling, we use our previously developed analytic approximations for the free
energy of one-component plasmas with rigid and polarizable electron background
and apply the linear mixing rule (LMR). Other thermodynamic functions are
obtained through analytic derivation of this free energy. In order to obtain an
analytic approximation for the intermediate coupling and transition to the
Debye-Hueckel limit, we perform hypernetted-chain calculations of the free
energy, internal energy, and pressure for mixtures of different ion species and
introduce a correction to the LMR, which allows a smooth transition from strong
to weak Coulomb coupling in agreement with the numerical results.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Role of the Random Magnetic Fields in the ISM: HVCs Numerical
  Simulations
Authors: A. Santillan, J. Kim, F. J. Sanchez-Salcedo, J. Franco, L. Hernandez-Cervantes
Date: 2008-12-23T06:26:03Z
Abstract:   We know that the galactic magnetic field possesses a random component in
addition to the mean uniform component, with comparable strength of the two
components. This random component is considered to play important roles in the
evolution of the interstellar medium (ISM). In this work we present numerical
simulations associated with the interaction of the supersonic flows located at
high latitude in our Galaxy (High Velocity Clouds, HVC) with the magnetized
galactic ISM in order to study the effect that produces a random magnetic field
in the evolution of this objects.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Accelerating Universe from Modified Kasner Model in Extra Dimensions
Authors: Masato Ito
Date: 2008-12-23T02:21:48Z
Abstract:   This paper has been withdrawn by the author.


Category: astro-ph
Title: AWAIC: A WISE Astronomical Image Co-adder
Authors: Frank J. Masci, John W. Fowler
Date: 2008-12-22T23:02:21Z
Abstract:   We describe a new image co-addition tool, AWAIC, to support the creation of a
digital Image Atlas from the multiple frame exposures acquired with the
Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE). AWAIC includes preparatory steps
such as frame background matching and outlier detection using robust
frame-stack statistics. Frame co-addition is based on using the detector's
Point Response Function (PRF) as an interpolation kernel. This kernel reduces
the impact of prior-masked pixels; enables the creation of an optimal matched
filtered product for point source detection; and most important, it allows for
resolution enhancement (HiRes) to yield a model of the sky that is consistent
with the observations to within measurement error. The HiRes functionality
allows for non-isoplanatic PRFs, prior noise-variance weighting, uncertainty
estimation, and includes a ringing-suppression algorithm. AWAIC also supports
the popular overlap-area weighted interpolation method, and is generic enough
for use on any astronomical image data that supports the FITS and WCS
standards.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Vetoing atmospheric neutrinos in a high energy neutrino telescope
Authors: Stefan Schönert, Thomas K. Gaisser, Elisa Resconi, Olaf Schulz
Date: 2008-12-22T22:53:10Z
Abstract:   We discuss the possibility to suppress downward atmospheric neutrinos in a
high energy neutrino telescope. This can be achieved by vetoing the muon which
is produced by the same parent meson decaying in the atmosphere. In principle,
atmospheric neutrinos with energies $E_\nu > 10$ TeV and zenith angle up to 60
degree can be vetoed with an efficiency of > 99%. Practical realization will
depend on the depth of the neutrino telescope, on the muon veto efficiency and
on the ability to identify downward moving neutrinos with a good energy
estimation.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Diffuse ionized gas in spiral galaxies and the disk-halo interaction
Authors: R. J. Reynolds, L. M. Haffner, G. J. Madsen, K. Wood, A. S. Hill
Date: 2008-12-22T22:41:33Z
Abstract:   Thick layers of warm, low density ionized hydrogen (i.e., the warm ionized
medium or WIM) in spiral galaxies provide direct evidence for an interaction
between the disk and halo. The wide-spread ionization implies that a
significant fraction of the Lyman continuum photons from O stars, produced
primarily in isolated star forming regions near the midplane and often
surrounded by opaque clouds of neutral hydrogen, is somehow able to propagate
large distances through the disk and into the halo. Moreover, even though O
stars are the source of the ionization, the temperature and ionization state of
the WIM differ significantly from what is observed in the classical O star H II
regions. Therefore, the existence of the WIM and observations of its properties
provide information about the structure of the interstellar medium and the
transport of energy away from the midplane as well as place significant
constraints on models.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Evaluation of (alpha,n) Induced Neutrons as a Background for Dark Matter
  Experiments
Authors: D. -M. Mei, C. Zhang, A. Hime
Date: 2008-12-22T22:36:23Z
Abstract:   Neutrons from ($\alpha$,n) reactions through thorium and uranium decays are
important sources of background for direct dark matter detection. The neutron
yields and energy spectra from a range of materials that are used to build dark
matter detectors are calculated and tabulated. In addition to thorium and
uranium decays, we found that $\alpha$ particles from samarium, often the
dopant of the window materials of photomultiplier tubes (PMT), are also an
important source of neutron yield. The results in this paper can be used as the
input to Monte Carlo simulations for many materials that will be used for next
generation experiments.


Category: astro-ph
Title: High Albedos of Low Inclination Classical Kuiper Belt Objects
Authors: M. J. Brucker, W. M. Grundy, J. A. Stansberry, J. R. Spencer, S. S. Sheppard, E. I. Chiang, M. W. Buie
Date: 2008-12-22T22:19:41Z
Abstract:   We present observations of thermal emission from fifteen transneptunian
objects (TNOs) made using the Spitzer Space Telescope. Thirteen of the targets
are members of the Classical population: six dynamically hot Classicals, five
dynamically cold Classicals, and two dynamically cold inner Classical Kuiper
Belt Objects (KBOs). We fit our observations using thermal models to determine
the sizes and albedos of our targets finding that the cold Classical TNOs have
distinctly higher visual albedos than the hot Classicals and other TNO
dynamical classes. The cold Classicals are known to be distinct from other TNOs
in terms of their color distribution, size distribution, and binarity fraction.
The Classical objects in our sample all have red colors yet they show a
diversity of albedos which suggests that there is not a simple relationship
between albedo and color. As a consequence of high albedos, the mass estimate
of the cold Classical Kuiper Belt is reduced from approximately 0.01 Earth
masses to approximately 0.001 Earth masses. Our results also increase
significantly the sample of small Classical KBOs with known albedos and sizes
from 21 to 32 such objects.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The GALEX View of Supernova Hosts
Authors: James D. Neill, Mark Sullivan, Mark Seibert
Date: 2008-12-22T21:09:21Z
Abstract:   We exploit the accumulating, high-quality, multi-wavelength imaging data of
nearby supernova (SN) hosts to explore the relationship between SN production
and host galaxy evolution. The Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX, Martin et al.,
2005) provides ultraviolet (UV) imaging in two bands, complementing data in the
optical and infra-red (IR). We compare host properties, derived from spectral
energy distribution (SED) fitting, with nearby, well-observed SN Ia light curve
properties. We also explore where the hosts of different types of SNe fall
relative to the red and blue sequences on the galaxy UV-optical color-magnitude
diagram (CMD, Wyder et al., 2007). We conclude that further exploration and
larger samples will provide useful results for constraining the progenitors of
SNe.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Breaking Halo Occupation Degeneracies with Marked Statistics
Authors: Martin White, Nikhil Padmanabhan
Date: 2008-12-22T21:00:06Z
Abstract:   We show that a suitably defined marked correlation function can be used to
break degeneracies in halo-occupation distribution modeling. The statistic can
be computed on both 3D and 2D data sets, and should be applicable to all
upcoming galaxy surveys. A proof of principle, using mock catalogs created from
N-body simulations, is given.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Neutral current neutrino-nucleus interactions at high energies
Authors: M. B. Gay Ducati, M. M. Machado, M. V. T. Machado
Date: 2008-12-22T19:49:15Z
Abstract:   We present a QCD analysis of the neutral current neutrino-nucleus interaction
at the small-x region using the color dipole formalism. This phenomenological
approach is quite successful in describing experimental results in deep
inelastic ep scattering and charged current neutrino-nucleus interactions at
high energies. We present theoretical predictions for the relevant structure
functions and the corresponding implications for the total NC neutrino cross
section.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Study of positrons from cosmic rays interactions and cold dark matter
  annihilations in the galactic environment
Authors: Roberto A. Lineros
Date: 2008-12-22T19:38:39Z
Abstract:   Positron and electron cosmic rays provide a complementary way to study the
galactic environment. The actual cosmic rays experiments, for instance PAMELA
and HEAT, have presented very exciting results in this field. The observed
positron fraction appears larger than the actual theoretical predictions for
energies larger than 10 GeV. The indirect evidences of Dark Matter in
connection with Beyond the Standard Model theories would suggest the existence
of an extra contribution present in the cosmic ray signal. We study and
calculate the positron signal produced by the annihilation of a generic Dark
Matter candidate. Especially, We analyze typical annihilation signatures and
the impact of CR propagation physics on the positron signal. In addition, we
study the positron signal related to spallation processes between nuclei
cosmic--rays and the interstellar gas. We analyze the effects of uncertainties
present in nuclear cross section, nuclei cosmic--ray and CR propagation
physics. The propagation of positrons is modeled according to the Two--Zone
Propagation Model which has been successfully tested in the study of nuclei
cosmic--ray and present an analytical approach to study the cosmic--ray
physics.


Category: astro-ph
Title: MHD Remote Numerical Simulations: Evolution of Coronal Mass Ejections
Authors: L. Hernandez-Cervantes, A. Santillan, A. R. Gonzalez-Ponce
Date: 2008-12-22T19:23:47Z
Abstract:   Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are solar eruptions into interplanetary space
of as much as a few billion tons of plasma, with embedded magnetic fields from
the Sun's corona. These perturbations play a very important role in
solar--terrestrial relations, in particular in the spaceweather. In this work
we present some preliminary results of the software development at the
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico to perform Remote MHD Numerical
Simulations. This is done to study the evolution of the CMEs in the
interplanetary medium through a Web-based interface and the results are store
into a database. The new astrophysical computational tool is called the Mexican
Virtual Solar Observatory (MVSO) and is aimed to create theoretical models that
may be helpful in the interpretation of observational solar data.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Connection between a Lyman Limit System, a very strong OVI Absorber,
  and Galaxies at z~0.203
Authors: N. Lehner, J. X. Prochaska, H. A. Kobulnicky, K. L. Cooksey, J. C. Howk, G. M. Williger, S. L. Cales
Date: 2008-12-22T17:56:07Z
Abstract:   With a column density log N(OVI) = 14.95+/-0.05, the OVI absorber at
z_abs~0.2028 observed toward the QSO PKS0312-77 (z_em=0.223) is the strongest
yet detected at z<0.5. At nearly identical redshift (z_abs=0.2026), we also
identify a Lyman limit system (LLS, log N(HI)=18.22). Combining FUV and NUV
spectra of PKS0312-77 with optical observations of galaxies in the surrounding
field (15'x32'), we present an analysis of these absorbers and their connection
to galaxies. The observed OI/HI ratio and photoionization modelling of other
low ions indicate the metallicity of the LLS is [Z/H]_LLS=-0.6 and that the LLS
is nearly 100% photoionized. In contrast, the OVI-bearing gas is collisionally
ionized at T~(3-10)x10^5 K as derived from the high-ion ratios and profile
broadenings. Our galaxy survey reveals 13 (0.3<L/L*<1.6) galaxies at \rho<2
h^{-1}_{70} Mpc and |\delta v|<1100 km/s from the LLS. A probable origin for
the LLS is debris from a galaxy merger, which led to a 0.7L* galaxy
([Z/H]_gal=+0.15) at\rho~38 h^{-1}_{70} kpc. Outflow from this galaxy may also
be responsible for the supersolar ([Z/H]_abs=+0.15), fully ionized absorber at
z_abs=0.2018 (-190 km/s from the LLS). The hot OVI absorber likely probes
coronal gas about the 0.7 L* galaxy and/or (~0.1 keV) intragroup gas of a
spiral-rich system. The association of other strong OVI absorbers with LLS
suggests they trace galactic and not intergalactic structures.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Time evolution of Wouthuysen-Field coupling
Authors: I. Roy, W. Xu, J. -M. Qiu, C. -W. Shu, L. -Z. Fang
Date: 2008-12-22T17:55:24Z
Abstract:   We study the Wouthuysen-Field coupling at early universe with numerical
solutions of the integrodifferential equation describing the kinetics of
photons undergoing resonant scattering. The numerical solver is developed based
on the weighted essentially non-oscillatory (WENO) scheme for the
Boltzmann-like integrodifferential equation. We focus on the time evolution of
the Wouthuysen-Field (W-F) coupling in relation to the 21 cm emission and
absorption at the epoch of reionization. We show that a local Boltzmann
distribution will be formed if photons with frequency \sim \nu_0 have undergone
a ten thousand or more times of scattering, which corresponds to the order of
10^3 yrs for neutral hydrogen density of the concordance \Lambda CDM model. The
time evolution of the shape and width of the local Boltzmann distribution
actually doesn't dependent on the details of atomic recoil, photon sources, or
initial conditions very much. However, the intensity of photon flux at the
local Boltzmann distribution is substantially time-dependent. The time scale of
approaching the saturated intensity can be as long as 10^5-10^6 yrs for typical
parameters of the \Lambda CDM model. The intensity of the local Boltzmann
distribution at time less than 10^5 yrs is significantly lower than that of the
saturation state. Therefore, it may not be always reasonable to assume that the
deviation of the spin temperature of 21 cm energy states from cosmic background
temperature is mainly due to the W-F coupling if first stars or their
emission/absorption regions evolved with a time scale equal to or less than
Myrs.


Category: astro-ph
Title: On Noncommutative Minisuperspace and the Friedmann equations
Authors: W. Guzmán, M. Sabido, J. Socorro
Date: 2008-12-22T17:37:50Z
Abstract:   In this paper we present noncommutative version of scalar field cosmology. We
find the noncommutative Friedmann equations as well as the noncommutative
Klein-Gordon equation. Interestingly the noncommutative contributions are only
present up to second order in the noncommutitive parameter. Finally we conclude
that if we want a noncommutative minisuperspace with a constant noncommutative
parameter as viable phenomenological model, the noncommuative parameter is very
small.


Category: astro-ph
Title: 1-d gravity in infinite point distributions
Authors: Andrea Gabrielli, Michael Joyce, Francois Sicard
Date: 2008-12-22T17:27:26Z
Abstract:   The dynamics of infinite, asymptotically uniform, distributions of
self-gravitating particles in one spatial dimension provides a simple toy model
for the analogous three dimensional problem. We focus here on a limitation of
such models as treated so far in the literature: the force, as it has been
specified, is well defined in infinite point distributions only if there is a
centre of symmetry (i.e. the definition requires explicitly the breaking of
statistical translational invariance). The problem arises because naive
background subtraction (due to expansion, or by "Jeans' swindle" for the static
case), applied as in three dimensions, leaves an unregulated contribution to
the force due to surface mass fluctuations. Following a discussion by
Kiessling, we show that the problem may be resolved by defining the force in
infinite point distributions as the limit of an exponentially screened pair
interaction. We show that this prescription gives a well defined (finite) force
acting on particles in a class of perturbed infinite lattices, which are the
point processes relevant to cosmological N-body simulations. For identical
particles the dynamics of the simplest toy model is equivalent to that of an
infinite set of points with inverted harmonic oscillator potentials which
bounce elastically when they collide. We discuss previous results in the
literature, and present new results for the specific case of this simplest
(static) model starting from "shuffled lattice" initial conditions. These show
qualitative properties (notably its "self-similarity") of the evolution very
similar to those in the analogous simulations in three dimensions, which in
turn resemble those in the expanding universe.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Recovering the real-space correlation function from photometric redshift
  surveys
Authors: Pablo Arnalte-Mur, Alberto Fernández-Soto, Vicent J. Martínez, Enn Saar, Pekka Heinämäki, Ivan Suhhonenko
Date: 2008-12-22T17:27:11Z
Abstract:   Measurements of clustering in large-scale imaging surveys that make use of
photometric redshifts depend on the uncertainties in the redshift
determination. We have used light-cone simulations to show how the deprojection
method successfully recovers the real space correlation function when applied
to mock photometric redshift surveys. We study how the errors in the redshift
determination affect the quality of the recovered two-point correlation
function. Considering the expected errors associated to the planned photometric
redshift surveys, we conclude that this method provides information on the
clustering of matter useful for the estimation of cosmological parameters that
depend on the large scale distribution of galaxies.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Mass Ejection by Strange Star Mergers and Observational Implications
Authors: A. Bauswein, H. -Th. Janka, R. Oechslin, G. Pagliara, I. Sagert, J. Schaffner-Bielich, M. M. Hohle, R. Neuhaeuser
Date: 2008-12-22T17:25:51Z
Abstract:   We determine the Galactic production rate of strangelets as a canonical input
to calculations of the measurable cosmic ray flux of strangelets by performing
simulations of strange star mergers and combining the results with recent
estimates of stellar binary populations. We find that the flux depends
sensitively on the bag constant of the MIT bag model of QCD and disappears for
high values of the bag constant and thus more compact strange stars. In the
latter case strange stars could coexist with ordinary neutron stars as they are
not converted by the capture of cosmic ray strangelets. An unambiguous
detection of an ordinary neutron star would then not rule out the strange
matter hypothesis.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Constraints on amplitudes of curvature perturbations from primordial
  black holes
Authors: Edgar Bugaev, Peter Klimai
Date: 2008-12-22T17:25:21Z
Abstract:   We calculate the primordial black hole (PBH) mass spectrum produced from a
collapse of the primordial density fluctuations in the early Universe using, as
an input, several theoretical models giving the curvature perturbation power
spectra with large (~ 0.01 - 0.1) values at some scale of comoving wave numbers
k. In the calculation we take into account the explicit dependence of
gravitational (Bardeen) potential on time. Using the PBH mass spectra, we
further calculate the neutrino and photon energy spectra in extragalactic space
from evaporation of light PBHs, and the energy density fraction contained in
PBHs today (for heavier PBHs). We obtain the constraints on the model
parameters using available experimental data (including data on neutrino and
photon cosmic backgrounds). We briefly discuss the possibility that the
observed 511 keV line from the Galactic center is produced by annihilation of
positrons evaporated by PBHs.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Keck/HIRES spectroscopy of V838 Monocerotis in October 2005
Authors: T. Kamiński, M. Schmidt, R. Tylenda, M. Konacki, M. Gromadzki
Date: 2008-12-22T17:02:26Z
Abstract:   V838 Mon erupted at the beginning of 2002 becoming an extremely luminous
star. Among various scenarios proposed to explain the nature of the outburst
the most promising is a stellar merger event. In this paper we investigate the
observational properties of the star and its surroundings in the post outburst
phase. We have obtained a high resolution optical spectrum of V838 Mon in
October 2005 using the Keck I telescope.We have identified numerous atomic
features and molecular bands present in the spectrum and provided an atlas of
those features. In order to improve the spectrum interpretation we have
performed simple modeling of the molecular bands. Our analysis indicates that
the spectrum is dominated by molecular absorption features arising in
photospheric regions with temperatures of ~2400 K and in colder outer layers,
where the temperature decreases down to ~500 K. A number of resonance lines of
neutral alkali metals are observed to show P-Cyg profiles. Particularly
interesting are numerous prominent emission lines of [FeII]. All of them show
practically the same profile, which can be well described by a Lorentzian
profile. In the blue part of the spectrum photospheric signatures of the B-type
companion are easily seen. We have fitted the observed spectrum with a
synthetic one and the obtained parameters are consistent with the B3V type. We
have also estimated radial and rotational velocities of the companion.


Category: astro-ph
Title: What is the closest black hole to the Sun?
Authors: C. Foellmi
Date: 2008-12-22T16:26:16Z
Abstract:   We examine the distance of the two galactic microquasars GRO J1655-40 and
A0620-00, which are potentially the two closest black holes to the Sun. We aim
to provide a picture as wide and complete as possible of the problem of
measuring the distance of microquasars in our Galaxy. The purpose of this work
is to fairly and critically review in great detail every distance method used
for these two microquasars in order to show that the distances of probably all
microquasars in our galaxy are much more uncertain than currently admitted.
Moreover, we show that many confirmations of quantitative results are often
entangled and rely on very uncertain measurements. We also present a new
determination of the maximum distance of GRO J1655-40 using red clump giant
stars, and show that it confirms our earlier result of a distance less than 2
kpc instead of 3.2 kpc. Since it then becomes more likely that GRO J1655-40
could originate from the stellar cluster NGC 6242, located at 1.0 kpc, we
review the distance estimations of A0620-00, which is so far the closest black
hole with an average distance of about 1.0 kpc. We show that the distance
methods used for A0620-00 are also problematic. Finally, we present a new
analysis of spectroscopic and astrometric archival data on this microquasar,
and apply the maximum-distance method of Foellmi et al. (2006). It appears that
A0620-00 could indeed be even closer to the Sun than currently estimated, and
consequently would be the closest known black hole to the Sun.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Studying ISM magnetic fields and turbulent regimes from polarimetric
  maps
Authors: D. Falceta-Goncalves, A. Lazarian, G. Kowal
Date: 2008-12-22T16:23:25Z
Abstract:   Polarimeric maps have been used on the characterization of the magnetic field
in molecular clouds. However, it is difficult to determine the 3-dimensional
properties of these regions from the projected maps. In that case, numerical
simulations can be used as benchmarks for polarimetric measurements, and
evetually reveal more about the interplay of turbulence and the magnetic field
lines. In this work we provide a number of MHD numerical simulations of
turbulent molecular clouds and created their synthetic dust emission
polarization maps, varying the direction of the observer. We determined the
correlation of emission intensity and polarization degree for the simulated
models. We were able to reproduce the decay on polarization degree at denser
regions without any assumption regarding the properties of the dusty component.
The anti-correlation arises from the simple cancelation of the polarization
vectors along the line of sight. This effect is amplified within denser regions
as the magnetic field configuration becomes more complex. We studied the
probability distribution, the power spectrum and the structure function of the
polarization angles. These statistical analysis revealed strong defferences
depending on the turbulent regime (i.e. sub/supersonic and sub/super-Alfvenic).
Therefore, these methods can be used on polarimetric observations to
characterize the dynamics of molecular clouds. We also presented a modified
Chandrashekhar-Fermi method to obtain the intensity of the local magnetic
field. The proposed formulation showed no limitations regarding orientation or
turbulent regime.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Competing bounds on the present-day time variation of fundamental
  constants
Authors: Thomas Dent, Steffen Stern, Christof Wetterich
Date: 2008-12-22T15:51:06Z
Abstract:   We compare the sensitivity of a recent bound on time variation of the fine
structure constant from optical clocks with bounds on time varying fundamental
constants from atomic clocks sensitive to the electron-to-proton mass ratio,
from radioactive decay rates in meteorites, and from the Oklo natural reactor.
Tests of the Weak Equivalence Principle also lead to comparable bounds on
present variations of constants. The "winner in sensitivity" depends on what
relations exist between the variations of different couplings in the standard
model of particle physics, which may arise from the unification of gauge
interactions. WEP tests are currently the most sensitive within unified
scenarios. A detection of time variation in atomic clocks would favour
dynamical dark energy and put strong constraints on the dynamics of a
cosmological scalar field.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Joule Heating and Anomalous Resistivity in the Solar Corona
Authors: Steven R. Spangler
Date: 2008-12-22T15:45:33Z
Abstract:   Recent radioastronomical observations of Faraday rotation in the solar corona
can be interpreted as evidence for coronal currents, with values as large as
$2.5 \times 10^9$ Amperes (Spangler 2007). These estimates of currents are used
to develop a model for Joule heating in the corona. It is assumed that the
currents are concentrated in thin current sheets, as suggested by theories of
two dimensional magnetohydrodynamic turbulence. The Spitzer result for the
resistivity is adopted as a lower limit to the true resistivity. The calculated
volumetric heating rate is compared with an independent theoretical estimate by
Cranmer et al (2007). This latter estimate accounts for the dynamic and
thermodynamic properties of the corona at a heliocentric distance of several
solar radii. Our calculated Joule heating rate is less than the Cranmer et al
estimate by at least a factor of $3 \times 10^5$. The currents inferred from
the observations of Spangler (2007) are not relevant to coronal heating unless
the true resistivity is enormously increased relative to the Spitzer value.
However, the same model for turbulent current sheets used to calculate the
heating rate also gives an electron drift speed which can be comparable to the
electron thermal speed, and larger than the ion acoustic speed. It is therefore
possible that the coronal current sheets are unstable to current-driven
instabilities which produce high levels of waves, enhance the resistivity and
thus the heating rate.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Discovery of non-radial pulsations in the spectroscopic binary Herbig Ae
  star RS Cha
Authors: T. Böhm, W. Zima, C. Catala, E. Alecian, K. Pollard, D. Wright
Date: 2008-12-22T15:28:16Z
Abstract:   In this article we present a first discovery of non radial pulsations in both
components of the Herbig Ae spectroscopic binary star RS Cha. The binary was
monitored in quasi-continuous observations during 14 observing nights (Jan
2006) at the 1m Mt John (New Zealand) telescope with the Hercules
high-resolution echelle spectrograph. The cumulated exposure time on the star
was 44 hrs, corresponding to 255 individual high-resolution echelle spectra
with $R = 45000$. Least square deconvolved spectra (LSD) were obtained for each
spectrum representing the effective photospheric absorption profile modified by
pulsations. Difference spectra were calculated by subtracting rotationally
broadened artificial profiles; these residual spectra were analysed and
non-radial pulsations were detected. A subsequent analysis with two
complementary methods, namely Fourier Parameter Fit (FPF) and Fourier 2D (F2D)
has been performed and first constraints on the pulsation modes have been
derived. In fact, both components of the spectroscopic binary are Herbig Ae
stars and both show NRPs. The FPF method identified 2 modes for the primary
component with (degree l, azimuthal number m) couples ordered by decreasing
probability: f_1 = 21.11 c/d with (l,m) = (11,11), (11,9) or (10,6) and f_2 =
30.38 c/d with (l,m) = (10,6) or (9,5). The F2D analysis indicates for f_1 a
degree l = 8-10. For the secondary component, the FPF method identified 3 modes
with (l,m) ordered by decreasing probability: f_1 = 12.81 c/d with (l,m) =
(2,1) or (2,2), f_2b = 19.11 c/d with (l,m) = (13,5) or (10,5) and f_3 = 24.56
c/d with (l,m) = (6,3) or (6,5). The F2D analysis indicates for f_1 a degree l
= 2 or 3, but proposes a contradictory identification of f_2 as a radial
pulsation (l = 0).


Category: astro-ph
Title: Towards millimeter VLBI
Authors: T. P. Krichbaum, U. Bach, D. A. Graham, W. Alef, A. Roy, A. Witzel, J. A. Zensus, M. Bremer, S. Sanchez
Date: 2008-12-22T15:19:25Z
Abstract:   We discuss the present performance and the future perspectives of VLBI in the
3 mm to 0.85 mm observing bands (so called mm-VLBI). The availability of new
telescopes and the recent technical development towards larger observing
bandwidth and higher data-rates now allow to image with 3mm-VLBI hundreds of
sources with high dynamic range. As an example we show new images of the jets
of Cygnus A. At 1.3 mm, pilot VLBI studies have proven detectability of the
brightest AGN, and the existence of ultra-compact regions therein. In the next
few years global VLBI imaging will be established also at 1.3 mm and 0.85 mm
wavelength. With an angular resolution in the 10-20 micro-arcsecond range,
future 1.3 mm- and 0.8 mm VLBI will be an extraordinarily powerful astronomical
observing method, allowing to image the enigmatic `central engines' and the
foot-points of AGN-jets in greater detail than ever possible before. A
sufficiently large number of telescopes is a prerequisite for global aperture
synthesis imaging. Therefore a strong effort is needed to make more telescopes
available for VLBI at short millimeter and sub-millimeter wavelengths. In this
context, the further VLBI upgrade of both IRAM telescopes and the outfit of the
APEX telescope in Chile, in preparation for later mm-/sub-mm VLBI with ALMA, is
of high scientific importance. With a sufficiently large mm-VLBI network, the
micro-arcsecond scale imaging of the post-Newtonian emission zone around the
event horizon/ergosphere of nearby super-massive Black Holes (such as e.g. Sgr
A*, M87, ...) should become possible within the next few years.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Imaging Very High Energy Gamma-Ray Telescopes
Authors: Heinrich J. Voelk, Konrad Bernloehr
Date: 2008-12-22T14:42:04Z
Abstract:   The technique of gamma-ray astronomy at very high energies (VHE: > 100 GeV)
with ground-based imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes is described, the
H.E.S.S. array in Namibia serving as example. Mainly a discussion of the
physical principles of the atmospheric Cherenkov technique is given,
emphasizing its rapid development during the last decade. The present status is
illustrated by two examples: the spectral and morphological characterization in
VHE gamma-rays of a shell-type supernova remnant together with its theoretical
interpretation, and the results of a survey of the Galactic Plane that shows a
large variety of non-thermal sources. The final part is devoted to an overview
of the ongoing and future instrumental developments.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Dark Matter Model Selection and the ATIC/PPB-BETS anomaly
Authors: Chuan-Ren Chen, Koichi Hamaguchi, Mihoko M. Nojiri, Fuminobu Takahashi, Shoji Torii
Date: 2008-12-22T14:39:17Z
Abstract:   We argue that we may be able to sort out dark matter models in which
electrons are generated through the annihilation and/or decay of dark matter,
by using a fact that the initial energy spectrum is reflected in the cosmic-ray
electron flux observed at the Earth even after propagation through the galactic
magnetic field. To illustrate our idea we focus on three representative initial
spectra: (i)monochromatic (ii)flat and (iii)double-peak ones. We find that
those three cases result in significantly different energy spectra, which may
be probed by the Fermi satellite in operation or an up-coming cosmic-ray
detector such as CALET.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Recent Torque Reversal of 4U 1907+09
Authors: S. C. Inam, S. Sahiner, A. Baykal
Date: 2008-12-22T13:55:28Z
Abstract:   We present timing and spectral analysis of RXTE-PCA observations of the
accretion powered pulsar 4U 1907+09 between June 2007 and August 2008. 4U
1907+09 had been in a spin-down episode with a spin-down rate of
$-3.54\times10^{-14}$ Hz s$^{-1}$ before 1999. From RXTE observations after
March 2001, the source showed a $\sim 60$% decrease in spin-down magnitude and
INTEGRAL observations after March 2003 showed that source started to spin-up.
We found that the source recently entered a new spin-down episode with a
spin-down rate of $-3.59 \times 10^{-14}$ Hz s$^{-1}$. This spin-down rate is
pretty close to the previous long term spin-down rate of the source measured
before 1999. From the spectral analysis, we showed that Hydrogen column density
varies with the orbital phase.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Fitting oscillating string gas cosmology to supernova data
Authors: Francesc Ferrer, Tuomas Multamaki, Syksy Rasanen
Date: 2008-12-22T13:41:19Z
Abstract:   In string gas cosmology, extra dimensions are stabilised by a gas of strings.
In the matter-dominated era, competition between matter pushing the extra
dimensions to expand and the string gas pulling them back can lead to
oscillations of the extra dimensions and acceleration in the visible
dimensions. We fit this model to supernova data, taking into account the Big
Bang Nucleosynthesis constraint on the energy density of the string gas. The
fit to the Union set of supernova data is acceptable, but the fit to the
ESSENCE data is poor.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Cosmological Evolution of a Tachyon-Quintom Model of Dark Energy
Authors: Shang-Gang Shi, Yun-Song Piao, Cong-Feng Qiao
Date: 2008-12-22T13:20:08Z
Abstract:   In this work we study the cosmological evolution of a dark energy model with
two scalar fields, i.e. the tachyon and the phantom tachyon. This model enables
the equation of state $w$ to change from $w>-1$ to $w<-1$ in the evolution of
the universe. The phase-space analysis for such a system with inverse square
potentials shows that there exists a unique stable critical point, which has
power-law solutions. In this paper, we also study another form of
tachyon-quintom model with two fields, which voluntarily involves the
interactions between both fields.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Double mode RR Lyrae stars in Omega Centauri
Authors: A. Olech, P. Moskalik
Date: 2008-12-22T13:02:36Z
Abstract:   Aim: The aim of this work was to search for double mode pulsators among RR
Lyr variables of globular cluster Omega Cen.
  Methods: We conducted a systematic frequency analysis of CASE photometry of
Omega Cen RR Lyr stars. We searched for periodicities using Fourier and ANOVA
periodograms, combined with consecutive prewhitening technique.
  Results: We discovered six double mode pulsators, with the first overtone and
a secondary mode of higher frequency simultaneously excited. These are the
first double mode RR Lyr stars identified in Omega Cen. In variable V10 period
ratio of the two modes is 0.80, which corresponds to pulsations in the first
and second radial overtones. In V19 and V105 we found unexpected period ratio
of 0.61. Three other stars display period ratios of either ~0.80 or ~0.61,
depending on the choice of aliases.
  Conclusions: While the period ratio of ~0.80 is easy to interpret in terms of
two lowest radial overtones, the value of ~0.61 cannot be explained by any two
radial modes. Thus, V19 and V105 are the first members of a new class of double
mode RR Lyr pulsators.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A k-essence Model Of Inflation, Dark Matter and Dark Energy
Authors: Nilok Bose, A. S. Majumdar
Date: 2008-12-22T11:51:56Z
Abstract:   We investigate the possibility for \textit{k}-essence dynamics to reproduce
the primary features of inflation in the early universe, generate dark matter
subsequently, and finally account for the presently observed acceleration. We
first show that for a purely kinetic \textit{k}-essence model the late time
energy density of the universe when expressed simply as a sum of a cosmological
constant and a dark matter term leads to a static universe. We then study
another \textit{k}-essence model in which the Lagrangian contains a potential
for the scalar field as well as a non-canonical kinetic term. We show that such
a model generates the basic features of inflation in the early universe, and
also gives rise to dark matter and dark energy at appropriate subsequent
stages. Observational constraints on the parameters of this model are obtained.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The isolated neutron star candidate 2XMM J104608.7-594306
Authors: A. M. Pires, C. Motch, R. Turolla, A. Treves, S. B. Popov
Date: 2008-12-22T11:08:35Z
Abstract:   Over the last decade, X-ray observations unveiled the existence of several
classes of isolated neutron stars (INSs) which are radio-quiet or exhibit radio
emission with properties much at variance with those of ordinary radio pulsars.
The identification of new sources is crucial in order to understand the
relations among the different classes and to compare observational constraints
with theoretical expectations. A recent analysis of the 2XMMp catalogue
provided less than 30 new thermally emitting INS candidates. Among these, the
source 2XMM J104608.7-594306 appears particularly interesting because of the
softness of its X-ray spectrum and of the present upper limits in the optical,
which imply a logarithmic X-ray-to-optical flux ratio greater than 3.1,
corrected for absorption. We present the X-ray and optical properties of 2XMM
J104608.7-594306 and discuss its nature in the light of two possible scenarios
invoked to explain the X-ray thermal emission from INSs: the release of
residual heat in a cooling neutron star, as in the seven radio-quiet
ROSAT-discovered INSs, and accretion from the interstellar medium. We find that
the present observational picture of 2XMM J104608.7-594306 is consistent with a
distant cooling INS with properties in agreement with the most up-to-date
expectations of population synthesis models: it is fainter, hotter and more
absorbed than the seven ROSAT sources and possibly located in the Carina
Nebula, a region likely to harbour unidentified cooling neutron stars. The
accretion scenario, although not entirely ruled out by observations, would
require a very slow (~10 km/s) INS accreting at the Bondi-Hoyle rate.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Measuring and calibrating Galactic synchrotron emission
Authors: Wolfgang Reich, Patricia Reich
Date: 2008-12-22T09:10:09Z
Abstract:   Our position inside the Galaxy requires all-sky surveys to reveal its
large-scale properties. The zero-level calibration of all-sky surveys differs
from standard 'relative' measurements, where a source is measured in respect to
its surroundings. All-sky surveys aim to include emission structures of all
angular scales exceeding their angular resolution including isotropic emission
components. Synchrotron radiation is the dominating emission process in the
Galaxy up to frequencies of a few GHz, where numerous ground based surveys of
the total intensity up to 1.4 GHz exist. Its polarization properties were just
recently mapped for the entire sky at 1.4 GHz. All-sky total intensity and
linear polarization maps from WMAP for frequencies of 23 GHz and higher became
available and complement existing sky maps. Galactic plane surveys have higher
angular resolution using large single-dish or synthesis telescopes. Polarized
diffuse emission shows structures with no relation to total intensity emission
resulting from Faraday rotation effects in the interstellar medium. The
interpretation of these polarization structures critically depends on a correct
setting of the absolute zero-level in Stokes U and Q.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Large-scale dynamos in rigidly rotating turbulent convection
Authors: P. J. Käpylä, M. J. Korpi, A. Brandenburg
Date: 2008-12-22T08:40:25Z
Abstract:   The existence of large-scale dynamos in rigidly rotating turbulent convection
without shear is studied using three-dimensional numerical simulations of
penetrative rotating compressible convection. We demonstrate that rotating
convection in a Cartesian domain can drive a large-scale dynamo even in the
absence of shear. The large-scale field contains a significant fraction of the
total field in the saturated state. The simulation results are compared with
one-dimensional mean-field dynamo models where turbulent transport
coefficients, as determined using the test field method, are used. The reason
for the absence of large-scale dynamo action in earlier studies is shown to be
due to the rotation being too slow: whereas the alpha-effect can change sign,
its magnitude stays approximately constant as a function of rotation, and the
turbulent diffusivity decreases monotonically with increasing rotation. Only
when rotation is rapid enough a large-scale dynamo can be excited. The
one-dimensional mean-field model with dynamo coefficients from the test field
results predicts reasonably well the dynamo excitation in the direct
simulations. This result further validates the test field procedure and
reinforces the interpretation that the observed dynamo is driven by a turbulent
alpha-effect. This result demonstrates the existence of an alpha-effect and an
alpha^2-dynamo with natural forcing.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Cosmological Constraints on Decaying Dark Matter
Authors: Santiago De Lope Amigo, William Man-Yin Cheung, Zhiqi Huang, Siew-Phang Ng
Date: 2008-12-22T07:04:57Z
Abstract:   We present a complete analysis of the cosmological constraints on decaying
dark matter. Previous analyses have used the cosmic microwave background and
Type Ia supernova. We have updated them with the latest data as well as
extended the analysis with the inclusion of Lyman-$\alpha$ forest, large scale
structure and weak lensing observations. Astrophysical constraints are not
considered in the present paper. The bounds on the lifetime of decaying dark
matter are dominated by either the late-time integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect for
the scenario with weak reionization, or CMB polarization observations when
there is significant reionization. For the respective scenarios, the lifetimes
for decaying dark matter are $\Gamma^{-1} \gtrsim 100$ Gyr and $ (f \Gamma)
^{-1} \gtrsim 5.3 \times 10^8$ Gyr (at 95.4% confidence level), where the
phenomenological parameter $f$ is the fraction of the decay energy deposited in
baryonic gas. This allows us to constrain particle physics models with dark
matter candidates through investigation of dark matter decays into Standard
Model particles via effective operators. For decaying dark matter of $\sim 100$
GeV mass, we found that the size of the coupling constant in the effective
dimension-4 operators responsible for dark matter decay has to generically be $
\lesssim 10^{-22}$. We have also explored the implications of our analysis for
representative models in theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking,
minimal supergravity and little Higgs.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Closed Spaces in Cosmology
Authors: Helio V. Fagundes
Date: 2008-12-22T06:07:39Z
Abstract:   This paper deals with two aspects of relativistic cosmologies with closed
(compact and boundless) spatial sections. These spacetimes are based on the
theory of General Relativity, and admit a foliation into space sections S(t),
which are spacelike hypersurfaces satisfying the postulate of the closure of
space: each S(t) is a 3-dimensional, closed Riemannian manifold. The discussed
topics are: (1) A comparison, previously obtained, between Thurston's
geometries and Bianchi-Kantowski-Sachs metrics for such 3-manifolds is here
clarified and developed. (2) Some implications of global inhomogeneity for
locally homogeneous 3-spaces of constant curvature are analyzed from an
observational viewpoint.


Category: astro-ph
Title: HD 91669b: A New Brown Dwarf Candidate from the McDonald Observatory
  Planet Search
Authors: Robert A. Wittenmyer, Michael Endl, William D. Cochran, Ivan Ramirez, Sabine Reffert, Phillip J. MacQueen, Matthew Shetrone
Date: 2008-12-22T05:46:40Z
Abstract:   We report the detection of a candidate brown dwarf orbiting the metal-rich K
dwarf HD 91669, based on radial-velocity data from the McDonald Observatory
Planet Search. HD 91669b is a substellar object in an eccentric orbit (e=0.45)
at a separation of 1.2 AU. The minimum mass of 30.6 Jupiter masses places this
object firmly within the brown dwarf desert for inclinations i>23 degrees. This
is the second rare close-in brown dwarf candidate discovered by the McDonald
planet search program.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Near Infrared Observations of the novae V2491 Cygni and V597 Puppis
Authors: Sachindra Naik, D. P. K. Banerjee, N. M. Ashok
Date: 2008-12-22T05:03:03Z
Abstract:   We present results obtained from near-infrared JHK spectroscopic observations
of novae V2491 Cyg and V597 Pup in the early declining phases of their 2007 and
2008 outbursts respectively. In both objects, the spectra displayed emission
lines of HI, OI, HeI and NI. In V597 Pup, the HeI lines were found to
strengthen rapidly with time. Based on the observed spectral characteristics,
both objects are classified as He/N novae. We have investigated the possibility
of V2491 Cyg being a recurrent nova as has been suggested. By studying the
temporal evolution of the line widths in V2491 Cyg it appears unlikely that the
binary companion is a giant star with heavy wind as in recurrent novae of the
RS Oph type. Significant deviations from that of recombination case B
conditions are observed in the strengths of the HI lines. This indicates that
the HI lines, in both novae, are optically thick during the span of our
observations. The slope of the continuum spectra in both cases was found to
have a \lambda^-(3-3.5) dependence which deviates from a Rayleigh-Jeans
spectral distribution. Both novae were detected in the post-outburst super-soft
X-ray phase; V2491 Cyg being very bright in X-rays has been the target of
several observations. We discuss and correlate our infrared observations with
the observed X-ray properties of these novae.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Negative feedback effects on star formation history and cosmic
  reionization
Authors: Lei Wang, Jirong Mao, Shouping Xiang, Ye-Fei Yuan
Date: 2008-12-22T03:11:36Z
Abstract:   After considering the effects of negative feedback on the process of star
formation, we explore the relationship between star formation process and the
associated feedback, by investigating how the mechanical feedback from
supernovae(SNe) and radiative feedback from luminous objects regulate the star
formation rate and therefore affect the cosmic reionization.Based on our
present knowledge of the negative feedback theory and some numerical
simulations, we construct an analytic model in the framework of the Lambda cold
dark matter model. In certain parameter regions, our model can explain some
observational results properly. In large halos(T_vir>10000 K), both mechanical
and radiative feedback have a similar behavior: the relative strength of
negative feedback reduces as the redshift decreases. In contrast, in small
halos (T_vir<10000 K$) that are thought to breed the first stars at early time,
the radiative feedback gets stronger when the redshift decreases. And the star
formation rate in these small halos depends very weakly on the star-formation
efficiency. Our results show that the radiative feedback is important for the
early generation stars. It can suppress the star formation rate considerably.
But the mechanical feedback from the SNe explosions is not able to affect the
early star formation significantly. The early star formation in small-halo
objects is likely to be self-regulated. The radiative and mechanical feedback
dominates the star formation rate of the PopII/I stars all along. The feedback
from first generation stars is very strong and should not be neglected.
However, their effects on the cosmic reionization are not significant, which
results in a small contribution to the optical depth of Thomson scattering.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The MiMeS Project: First Results
Authors: J. H. Grunhut, E. Alecian, D. A. Bohlender, J. -C. Bouret, H. Henrichs, C. Neiner, V. Petit, N. St. Louis, G. A. Wade, M. Auriere, O. Kochukhov, J. Silvester, A. ud-Doula, the MiMeS Collaboration
Date: 2008-12-22T01:39:14Z
Abstract:   Massive stars are those stars with initial masses above about 8 times that of
the sun, eventually leading to catastrophic explosions in the form of
supernovae. These represent the most massive and luminous stellar component of
the Universe, and are the crucibles in which the lion's share of the chemical
elements are forged. These rapidly-evolving stars drive the chemistry,
structure and evolution of galaxies, dominating the ecology of the Universe -
not only as supernovae, but also during their entire lifetimes - with
far-reaching consequences.
  Although the existence of magnetic fields in massive stars is no longer in
question, our knowledge of the basic statistical properties of massive star
magnetic fields is seriously incomplete. The Magnetism in Massive Stars (MiMeS)
Project represents a comprehensive, multidisciplinary strategy by an
international team of recognized researchers to address the "big questions"
related to the complex and puzzling magnetism of massive stars. This paper
present the first results of the MiMeS Large Program at the
Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The MiMeS Project: Magnetism in Massive Stars
Authors: G. A. Wade, E. Alecian, D. A. Bohlender, J. -C. Bouret, J. H. Grunhut, H. Henrichs, C. Neiner, V. Petit, N. St. Louis, M. Auriere, O. Kochukhov, J. Silvester, A. ud-Doula, the MiMeS Collaboration
Date: 2008-12-22T01:32:16Z
Abstract:   The Magnetism in Massive Stars (MiMeS) Project is a consensus collaboration
among the foremost international researchers of the physics of hot, massive
stars, with the basic aim of understanding the origin, evolution and impact of
magnetic fields in these objects. The cornerstone of the project is the MiMeS
Large Program at the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope, which represents a
dedication of 640 hours of telescope time from 2008-2012. The MiMeS Large
Program will exploit the unique capabilities of the ESPaDOnS spectropolarimeter
to obtain critical missing information about the poorly-studied magnetic
properties of these important stars, to confront current models and to guide
theory.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Photometric and Spectroscopic Observations of V1280 Sco
Authors: Hiroyuki Naito, Sahori Mizoguchi, Akira Arai, Masayuki Yamanaka, Shin-ya Narusawa, Kozo Sadakane, Takashi Iijima
Date: 2008-12-22T00:49:16Z
Abstract:   Photometries of B, V, Rc, Ic, y, J, and Ks bands and low dispersion optical
spectroscopic observations of Nova V1280 Sco, started soon after the outburst,
are reported. We show that V1280 Sco is an Fe II nova and it is going through
the historically slowest spectroscopic evolution. The rapid decline observed in
the early phase was caused by formation of a dust shell. We estimate the
abundances of CNO using the absorption lines on a spectrum at pre-maximum, and
find over-abundances by [C/Fe] ~ 1.4, [N/Fe] > 2.0 and [O/Fe] ~ 1.1.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Efficiency of Neutrino Annihilation around Spinning Black Holes
Authors: Ivan Zalamea, Andrei M. Beloborodov
Date: 2008-12-21T21:19:15Z
Abstract:   A fraction of neutrino emission from GRB accretion disks annihilates above
the disk, creating e+- plasma that can drive GRB explosions. We calculate the
efficiency of this annihilation using the recent detailed model of
hyper-accretion disks around Kerr black holes. Our calculation is fully
relativistic and based on a geodesic-tracing method. We find that the
efficiency is a well-defined function of (1) accretion rate and (2) spin of the
black hole. It is practically independent of the details of neutrino transport
in the opaque zone of the disk. The results help identify the accretion disks
whose neutrino emission can power GRBs.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Curious Variables Experiment (CURVE). CCD photometry of active dwarf
  nova DI UMa
Authors: A. Rutkowski, A. Olech, M. Wiśniewski, P. Pietrukowicz, J. Pala, R. Poleski
Date: 2008-12-21T18:11:28Z
Abstract:   We report an analysis of photometric behaviour of DI UMa, an extremely active
dwarf nova. The observational campaign (completed in 2007) covers five
superoutbursts and four normal outbursts. We examined principal parameters of
the system to understand peculiarities of DI UMa, and other active cataclysmic
variables. Based on precise photometric measurements, temporal light curve
behaviour, O-C analysis, and power spectrum analysis, we investigated physical
parameters of the system. We found that the period of the supercycle now equals
31.45 +/-0.3 days. Observations during superoutbursts infer that the period of
superhumps equals P_sh = 0.055318(11) days (79.66 +/- 0.02 min). During
quiescence, the light curve reveals a modulation of period P_orb = 0.054579(6)
days (78.59 +/- 0.01 min), which we interpret as the orbital period of the
binary system. The values obtained allowed us to determine a fractional period
excess of 1.35% +/- 0.02%, which is surprisingly small compared to the usual
value for dwarf novae (2%-5%). A detailed O-C analysis was performed for two
superoutbursts with the most comprehensive coverage. In both cases, we detected
an increase in the superhump period with a mean rate of dot_P/P_sh =
4.4(1.0)*10^{-5}. Based on these measurements, we confirm that DI UMa is
probably a period bouncer, an old system that reached its period minimum a long
time ago, has a secondary that became a degenerate brown dwarf, the entire
system evolving now toward longer periods. DI UMa is an extremely interesting
object because we know only one more active ER UMa star with similar
characteristics (IX Dra).


Category: astro-ph
Title: Calculation of the Local Standard of Rest from 20,574 Local Stars in the
  New Hipparcos Reduction with Known Radial Velocities
Authors: Charles Francis, Erik Anderson
Date: 2008-12-21T14:41:48Z
Abstract:   Context. An accurate estimate of the local standard of rest (LSR) is required
to determine key parameters used in approximate galactic mass models and to
understand Galactic structure and evolution. However, authors are often forced
to base dynamical analyses on potentially unreliable figures because recent
determinations of the LSR have failed to reach agreement, especially with
regard to the direction, V, of Galactic rotation. Aims. To explain why the
traditional method for calculating the LSR fails, and to find alternative means
of calculating the LSR with realistic error margins. Methods. We assemble and
investigate the kinematic properties of 20 574 stars within 300pc, with
complete and accurate kinematic data. The traditional method of calculating the
LSR assumes a well-mixed distribution. In fact, the velocity distribution is
highly structured, invalidating calculations based on mean motions and
asymmetric drift. We find other indicators in the distribution which we believe
give a better estimate of circular motion. Results. We find good agreement
between results and give as our best estimate of the LSR (U_0, V_0, W_0) = (7.5
+- 1.0, 13.5 +- 0.3, 6.8 +- 0.1) km/s. We calculate the slope of the circular
speed curve at the solar radius, finding -9.3 +- 0.9 km/s/kpc.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Kinetic theory for scalar fields with nonlocal quantum coherence
Authors: Matti Herranen, Kimmo Kainulainen, Pyry Matti Rahkila
Date: 2008-12-21T14:32:16Z
Abstract:   We derive quantum kinetic equations for scalar fields undergoing coherent
evolution either in time (coherent particle production) or in space (quantum
reflection). Our central finding is that in systems with certain space-time
symmetries, quantum coherence manifests itself in the form of new spectral
solutions for the dynamical 2-point correlation function. This spectral
structure leads to a consistent approximation for dynamical equations that
describe coherent evolution in presence of decohering collisions. We illustrate
the method by solving the bosonic Klein problem and the bound states for the
nonrelativistic square well potential. We then compare our spectral phase space
definition of particle number to other definitions in the nonequilibrium field
theory. Finally we will explicitly compute the effects of interactions to
coherent particle production in the case of an unstable field coupled to an
oscillating background.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A galaxy dynamo by supernova-driven interstellar turbulence
Authors: Oliver Gressel, Udo Ziegler, Detlef Elstner, Günther Rüdiger
Date: 2008-12-21T08:44:17Z
Abstract:   Supernovae are the dominant energy source for driving turbulence within the
interstellar plasma. Until recently, their effects on magnetic field
amplification in disk galaxies remained a matter of speculation. By means of
self-consistent simulations of supernova-driven turbulence, we find an
exponential amplification of the mean magnetic field on timescales of a few
hundred million years. The robustness of the observed fast dynamo is checked at
different magnetic Reynolds numbers, and we find sustained dynamo action at
moderate Rm. This indicates that the mechanism might indeed be of relevance for
the real ISM.
  Sensing the flow via passive tracer fields, we infer that SNe produce a
turbulent alpha effect which is consistent with the predictions of quasilinear
theory. To lay a foundation for global mean-field models, we aim to explore the
scaling of the dynamo tensors with respect to the key parameters of our
simulations. Here we give a first account on the variation with the supernova
rate.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Brilliant Pebbles: A Method for Detection of Very Large Interstellar
  Grains
Authors: Aristotle Socrates, Bruce T. Draine
Date: 2008-12-21T05:21:41Z
Abstract:   A photon of wavelength lambda ~1 micron interacting with a dust grain of
radius a_p ~ 1 mm (a "pebble") undergoes scattering in the forward direction,
largely within a small characteristic diffraction angle theta_s ~ lambda/a_p ~
100". Though mm-size dust grains contribute negligibly to the interstellar
medium's visual extinction, the signal they produce in scattered light may be
detectable, especially for variable sources. Observations of light scattered at
small angles allows for the direct measurement of the large grain population;
variable sources can also yield tomographic information of the interstellar
medium's mass distribution. The ability to detect brilliant pebble halos
require a careful understanding of the instrument PSF.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Review of Observational Evidence for Dark Matter in the Universe and in
  upcoming searches for Dark Stars
Authors: Katherine Freese
Date: 2008-12-20T22:28:05Z
Abstract:   Over the past decade, a consensus picture has emerged in which roughly a
quarter of the universe consists of dark matter. The observational evidence for
the existence of dark matter is reviewed: rotation curves of galaxies, weak
lensing measurements, hot gas in clusters, primordial nucleosynthesis and
microwave background experiments. In addition, a new line of research on Dark
Stars is presented, which suggests that the first stars to exist in the
universe were powered by dark matter heating rather than by fusion: the
observational possibilities of discovering dark matter in this way are
discussed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Neutrino Astronomy with the IceCube Observatory and Implications for
  Astroparticle Physics
Authors: Paolo Desiati
Date: 2008-12-20T21:40:55Z
Abstract:   The IceCube Observatory is a km^3 neutrino telescope currently under
construction at the geographic South Pole. It will comprise 4800 optical
sensors deployed on 80 vertical strings between 1450 and 2450 meters under the
ice surface. Currently IceCube is operational and recording data with 40
strings (i.e. 2400 optical sensors). The IceCube Observatory will collect an
unprecedented number of high energy neutrinos that will allow us to pursue
studies of the atmospheric neutrino flux, and to search for extraterrestrial
sources of neutrinos, whether point-like or unresolved. IceCube results will
have an important impact on neutrino astrophysics, especially if combined with
observations done with other cosmic messengers, such as gamma rays or ultra
high energy cosmic rays. They may also reveal clues on the origin of cosmic
rays at ultra high energies. Here we report results from AMANDA and the most
recent results from the first 22 strings of IceCube.


Category: astro-ph
Title: String dynamics and ejection along the axis of a spinning black hole
Authors: Ted Jacobson, Thomas P. Sotiriou
Date: 2008-12-20T20:50:25Z
Abstract:   Relativistic current carrying strings moving axisymmetrically on the
background of a Kerr black hole are studied. The boundaries and possible types
of motion of a string with a given energy and current are found. Regions of
parameters for which the string falls into the black hole, or is trapped in a
toroidal volume, or can escape to infinity, are identified, and representative
trajectories are examined by numerical integration, illustrating various
interesting behaviors. In particular, we find that a string can start out at
rest near the equatorial plane and, after bouncing around, be ejected out along
the axis, some of its internal (elastic or rotational kinetic) energy having
been transformed into translational kinetic energy. The resulting velocity can
be an order unity fraction of the speed of light. This process results from the
presence of an outer tension barrier and an inner angular momentum barrier that
are deformed by the gravitational field. We speculatively discuss the possible
astrophysical significance of this mechanism as a means of launching a
collimated jet of MHD plasma flux tubes along the spin axis of a gravitating
system fed by an accretion disk.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Interface Modes and Their Instabilities in Accretion Disc Boundary
  Layers
Authors: David Tsang, Dong Lai
Date: 2008-12-20T20:46:52Z
Abstract:   We study global non-axisymmetric oscillation modes trapped near the inner
boundary of an accretion disc. Observations indicate that some of the
quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs) observed in the luminosities of accreting
compact objects (neutron stars, black holes and white dwarfs) are produced in
the inner-most regions of accretion discs or boundary layers. Two simple models
are considered in this paper: The magnetosphere-disc model consists of a thin
Keplerian disc in contact with a uniformly rotating magnetosphere with and low
plasma density, while the star-disc model involves a Keplerian disc terminated
at the stellar atomosphere with high density and small density scale height. We
find that the interface modes at the magnetosphere-disc boundary are generally
unstable due to Rayleigh-Taylor and/or Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities. However,
differential rotation of the disc tends to suppress Rayleigh-Taylor instability
and a sufficiently high disc sound speed (or temperature) is needed to overcome
this suppression and to attain net mode growth. On the other hand,
Kelvin-Helmholtz instability may be active at low disc sound speeds. We also
find that the interface modes trapped at the boundary between a thin disc and
an unmagnetized star do not suffer Rayleigh-Taylor or Kelvin-Helmholtz
instability, but can become unstable due to wave leakage to large disc radii
and, for sufficiently steep disc density distributions, due to wave absorption
at the corotation resonance in the disc. The non-axisymmetric interface modes
studied in this paper may be relevant to the high-frequency QPOs observed in
some X-ray binaries and in cataclysmic variables.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Steady-State Solutions in Nonlinear Diffusive Shock Acceleration
Authors: B. Reville, J. G. Kirk, P. Duffy
Date: 2008-12-20T19:32:12Z
Abstract:   Stationary solutions to the equations of non-linear diffusive shock
acceleration play a fundamental role in the theory of cosmic-ray acceleration.
Their existence usually requires that a fraction of the accelerated particles
be allowed to escape from the system. Because the scattering mean-free-path is
thought to be an increasing function of energy, this condition is
conventionally implemented as an upper cut-off in energy space -- particles are
then permitted to escape from any part of the system, once their energy exceeds
this limit. However, because accelerated particles are responsible for
substantial amplification of the ambient magnetic field in a region upstream of
the shock front, we examine an alternative approach in which particles escape
over a spatial boundary. We use a simple iterative scheme that constructs
stationary numerical solutions to the coupled kinetic and hydrodynamic
equations. For parameters appropriate for supernova remnants, we find
stationary solutions with efficient acceleration when the escape boundary is
placed at the point where growth and advection of strongly driven non-resonant
waves are in balance. We also present the energy dependence of the distribution
function close to the energy where it cuts off - a diagnostic that is in
principle accessible to observation.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Relativistic Accretion Mediated by Turbulent Comptonization
Authors: Aristotle Socrates
Date: 2008-12-20T18:22:34Z
Abstract:   Black hole and neutron star accretion flows display unusually high levels of
hard coronal emission in comparison to all other optically thick,
gravitationally bound, turbulent astrophysical systems. Since these flows sit
in deep relativistic gravitational potentials, their random bulk motions
approach the speed of light, therefore allowing turbulent Comptonization to be
an important effect. We show that the inevitable production of hard X-ray
photons results from turbulent Comptonization in the limit where the turbulence
is trans-sonic and the accretion power approaches the Eddington Limit. In this
regime, the turbulent Compton y-parameter approaches unity and the turbulent
Compton temperature is a significant fraction of the electron rest mass energy,
in agreement with the observed phenomena.


Category: astro-ph
Title: CNO "Breakout" and Nucleosynthesis in Classical Novae
Authors: S. Ami Glasner, Jame. W. Truran
Date: 2008-12-20T17:45:55Z
Abstract:   For very slow white dwarf accretors in CV's Townsley and Bildsten (2004)
found a relation between the accretion rate and the central temperature of the
white dwarf Tc. According to this relation for accretion rates less than 10^-10
solar masses per year Tc is much lower than 10^7 K.
  Motivated by this study we follow the thermonuclear runaway on massive white
dwarfs (M_WD=1.25 - 1.40 solar masses) with Tc lower than 10^7 K, accreting
matter of solar composition. We demonstrate that in that range of the relevant
parameter space (Tc,M_WD and accretion rate) the slope of the relation between
the peak temperatures achieved during the runaway and Tc becomes much steeper
than its value for Tc above 10^7 K. The peak temperatures we derive can lead to
nuclear breakout from the conventional "hot carbon-nitrogen-oxygen" cycle. When
breakout conditions are achieved the heavy element abundances can show a much
wider variety than what is possible with the common enrichment mechanisms.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Eppur si muove
Authors: Michał Chodorowski
Date: 2008-12-20T16:52:14Z
Abstract:   In two recent papers, Abramowicz et al. claim that the expansion of the
Universe can be interpreted only as the expansion of space. In fact, what they
really prove is that the cosmological expansion cannot be described in terms of
real motions in Minkowski spacetime. However, there is no controversy about
this issue. Abramowicz et al. show that in general, the cosmological redshift
is not a Doppler shift and they consider this fact as a proof that space
expands. Again, nobody believes (perhaps except Milne) that for non-empty
universes the origin of the redshift is purely Dopplerian. From the Principle
of Equivalence it follows that there must be also a gravitational shift in
presence of matter. Indeed, it is well known in cosmology that for small
redshifts, the cosmological redshift can be decomposed into a Doppler component
and a gravitational component. In a forthcoming paper, we shall perform such a
decomposition for arbitrarily large values of the redshift.


Category: astro-ph
Title: IceCube: Construction Status and First Results
Authors: Albrecht Karle
Date: 2008-12-20T16:46:45Z
Abstract:   IceCube is a 1 km3 neutrino telescope currently under construction at the
South Pole. The detector will consist of 4800 optical sensors deployed at
depths between 1450 m and 2450 m in clear Antarctic ice evenly distributed over
80 strings. An air shower array covering a surface area of 1 km^2 above the
in-ice detector will measure cosmic ray air showers in the energy range from
300 TeV to above 1 EeV. The detector is designed to detect neutrinos of all
flavors. With 40 strings currently in operation, construction is 50% complete.
Based on data taken to date, the observatory meets its design goals and
currently exceeds the sensitivity of AMANDA and previous neutrino telescopes.
The construction outlook and possible future extensions are also discussed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Magellanic System: What have we learnt from FUSE?
Authors: N. Lehner
Date: 2008-12-20T16:01:04Z
Abstract:   I review some of the findings on the Magellanic System produced by the Far
Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) during and after its eight years of
service. The Magellanic System with its high-velocity complexes provides a
nearby laboratory that can be used to characterize phenomena that involve
interaction between galaxies, infall and outflow of gas and metals in galaxies.
These processes are crucial for understanding the evolution of galaxies and the
intergalactic medium. Among the FUSE successes I highlight are the coronal gas
about the LMC and SMC, and beyond in the Stream, the outflows from these
galaxies, the discovery of molecules in the diffuse gas of the Stream and the
Bridge, an extremely sub-solar and sub-SMC metallicity of the Bridge, and a
high-velocity complex between the Milky Way and the Clouds.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Recent Evidence for Convection in Sunspot Penumbrae
Authors: G. B. Scharmer
Date: 2008-12-20T15:22:08Z
Abstract:   Whereas penumbral models during the last 15 years have been successful in
explaining Evershed flows and magnetic field inclination variations in terms of
flux tubes, the lack of contact between these models and a convective process
needed to explain the penumbral radiative heat flux has been disturbing. We
report on recent observational and theoretical evidence that challenge flux
tube interpretations and conclude that the origin of penumbral filamentary
structure is overturning convection.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Hydrodynamical N-body simulations of coupled dark energy cosmologies
Authors: Marco Baldi, Valeria Pettorino, Georg Robbers, Volker Springel
Date: 2008-12-20T15:03:15Z
Abstract:   If the accelerated expansion of the Universe at the present epoch is driven
by a dark energy scalar field, there may well be a non-trivial coupling between
the dark energy and the cold dark matter (CDM) fluid. Such interactions give
rise to new features in cosmological structure growth, like an additional
long-range attractive force between CDM particles, or variations of the dark
matter particle mass with time. We have implemented these effects in the N-body
code GADGET-2 and present results of a series of high-resolution N-body
simulations where the dark energy component is directly interacting with the
cold dark matter. As a consequence of the new physics, CDM and baryon
distributions evolve differently both in the linear and in the nonlinear regime
of structure formation. Already on large scales a linear bias develops between
these two components, which is further enhanced by the nonlinear evolution. We
also find, in contrast with previous work, that the density profiles of CDM
halos are less concentrated in coupled dark energy cosmologies compared with
LCDM, and that this feature does not depend on the initial conditions setup,
but is a specific consequence of the extra physics induced by the coupling.
Also, the baryon fraction in halos in the coupled models is significantly
reduced below the universal baryon fraction. These features alleviate tensions
between observations and the LCDM model on small scales. Our methodology is
ideally suited to explore the predictions of coupled dark energy models in the
fully non-linear regime, which can provide powerful constraints for the viable
parameter space of such scenarios.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Capability of Cherenkov Telescopes to Observe Ultra-fast Optical Flares
Authors: C. Deil, W. Domainko, G. Hermann, A. -C. Clapson, A. Förster, C. van Eldik, W. Hofmann
Date: 2008-12-20T13:46:17Z
Abstract:   The large optical reflector (~ 100 m^2) of a H.E.S.S. Cherenkov telescope was
used to search for very fast optical transients of astrophysical origin. 43
hours of observations targeting stellar-mass black holes and neutron stars were
obtained using a dedicated photometer with microsecond time resolution. The
photometer consists of seven photomultiplier tube pixels: a central one to
monitor the target and a surrounding ring of six pixels to veto background
events. The light curves of all pixels were recorded continuously and were
searched offline with a matched-filtering technique for flares with a duration
of 2 us to 100 ms. As expected, many unresolved (<3 us) and many long (>500 us)
background events originating in the earth's atmosphere were detected. In the
time range 3 to 500 us the measurement is essentially background-free, with
only eight events detected in 43 h; five from lightning and three presumably
from a piece of space debris. The detection of flashes of brightness ~ 0.1 Jy
and only 20 us duration from the space debris shows the potential of this setup
to find rare optical flares on timescales of tens of microseconds. This
timescale corresponds to the light crossing time of stellar-mass black holes
and neutron stars.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A Sensitive Search For [NII] Emission in a z=6.4 Quasar Host Galaxy
Authors: F. Walter, A. Weiss, D. A. Riechers, C. L. Carilli, F. Bertoldi, P. Cox, K. Menten
Date: 2008-12-20T11:21:04Z
Abstract:   We present a sensitive search for the ^3P_1->^3P_0 ground state fine
structure line at 205 microns of ionized nitrogen ([NII]) in one of the highest
redshift quasars (J1148+5251 at z=6.42) using the IRAM 30m telescope. The line
is not detected at a (3 sigma) depth of 0.47 Jy km s^-1, corresponding to a
[NII] luminosity limit of L_[NII] < 4.0x10^8 L_sun and a L_[NII]/L$_FIR ratio
of <2x10^-5. In parallel, we have observed the CO(J=6-5) line in J1148+5251,
which is detected at a flux level consistent with earlier interferometric
observations. Using our earlier measurements of the [CII] 158 micron line
strength, we derive an upper limit for the [NII]/[CII] line luminosity ratio of
~1/10 in J1148+5251. Our upper limit for the [CII]/[NII] ratio is similar to
the value found for our Galaxy and M82 (the only extragalactic system where the
[NII] line has been detected to date). Given the non-detection of the [NII]
line we can only speculate whether or not high-z detections are within reach of
currently operating observatories. However, [NII] and other fine strucure lines
will play a critical role in characterizing the interstellar medium at the
highest redshifts (z>7) using the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
(ALMA), for which the highly excited rotational transitions of CO will be
shifted outside the accessible (sub-)millimeter bands.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Physics of Neutron Star Crusts
Authors: N. Chamel, P. Haensel
Date: 2008-12-20T10:43:21Z
Abstract:   The physics of neutron star crusts is vast, involving many different research
fields, from nuclear and condensed matter physics to general relativity. This
review summarizes the progress, which has been achieved over the last few
years, in modeling neutron star crusts, both at the microscopic and macroscopic
levels. The confrontation of these theoretical models with observations is also
briefly discussed.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The prospects of finding the first quasars in the universe
Authors: Dominik R. G. Schleicher, Marco Spaans, Ralf S. Klessen
Date: 2008-12-20T09:15:19Z
Abstract:   We study the prospects of finding the first quasars in the universe with ALMA
and JWST. For this purpose, we derive a model for the high-redshift black hole
population based on observed relations between the black hole mass and the host
galaxy. We re-address previous constraints from the X-ray background with
particular focus on black hole luminosities below the Eddington limit as
observed in many local AGN. For such luminosities, up to 20% of high-redshift
black holes can be active quasars. We then discuss the observables of
high-redshift black holes for ALMA and JWST by adopting NGC 1068 as a reference
system. We calculate the expected flux of different fine-structure lines for a
similar system at higher redshift, and provide further predictions for high-J
CO lines. We discuss the expected fluxes from stellar light, the AGN continuum
and the Lyman $\alpha$ line for JWST. Line fluxes observed with ALMA can be
used to derive detailed properties of high-redshift sources. We suggest two
observational strategies to find potential AGN at high redshift and estimate
the expected number of sources, which is between 1-10 for ALMA with a field of
view of $\sim(1')^2$ searching for line emission and 100-1000 for JWST with a
field of view of $(2.16')^2$ searching for continuum radiation. We find that
both telescopes can probe high-redshift quasars down to redshift 10 and beyond,
and therefore truely detect the first quasars in the universe.


Category: astro-ph
Title: MOJAVE: Monitoring of Jets in AGN with VLBA Experiments. V. Multi-epoch
  VLBA Images
Authors: M. L. Lister, H. D. Aller, M. F. Aller, M. H. Cohen, D. C. Homan, M. Kadler, K. I. Kellermann, Y. Y. Kovalev, E. Ros, T. Savolainen, J. A. Zensus, R. C. Vermeulen
Date: 2008-12-20T08:35:33Z
Abstract:   We present images from a long term program (MOJAVE: Monitoring of Jets in AGN
with VLBA Experiments) to survey the structure and evolution of parsec-scale
jet phenomena associated with bright radio-loud active galaxies in the northern
sky. The observations consist of 2424 15 GHz VLBA images of a complete
flux-density limited sample of 135 AGN above declination -20 degrees, spanning
the period 1994 August to 2007 September. These data were acquired as part of
the MOJAVE and 2 cm Survey programs, and from the VLBA archive. The sample
selection criteria are based on multi-epoch parsec-scale (VLBA) flux density,
and heavily favor highly variable and compact blazars. The sample includes
nearly all the most prominent blazars in the northern sky, and is well-suited
for statistical analysis and comparison with studies at other wavelengths. Our
multi-epoch and stacked-epoch images show 94% of the sample to have apparent
one-sided jet morphologies, most likely due to the effects of relativistic
beaming. Of the remaining sources, five have two-sided parsec-scale jets, and
three are effectively unresolved by the VLBA at 15 GHz, with essentially all of
the flux density contained within a few tenths of a milliarcsecond.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Pulsar timing and spacetime curvature
Authors: Teviet Creighton, Fredrick A. Jenet, Richard H. Price
Date: 2008-12-20T06:26:04Z
Abstract:   We analyze the effect of weak field gravitational waves on the timing of
pulsars, with particular attention to gauge invariance, that is, to the effects
that are independent of the choice of coordinates. We find: (i) the Doppler
shift cannot be separated into gauge invariant gravitational wave and kinetic
contributions; (ii) a gauge invariant separation can be made for the time
derivative of the Doppler shift in which the gravitational wave contribution is
directly related to the Riemann tensor, and the kinetic contribution is that
for special relativity; (iii) the gauge dependent effects in the Doppler shift
play no role in the program of gravitational wave detection via pulsar timing.
The direct connection shown between pulsar timing and the Riemann tensor of the
gravitational waves will be of importance in discussions of gravitational waves
from alternative (non-Einsteinian) theories of gravitation.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Sloan Bright Arcs Survey : Six Strongly Lensed Galaxies at z=0.4-1.4
Authors: Jeffrey M. Kubo, Sahar S. Allam, James Annis, Elizabeth J. Buckley-Geer, H. Thomas Diehl, Donna Kubik, Huan Lin, Douglas Tucker
Date: 2008-12-20T04:43:52Z
Abstract:   We present new results of our program to systematically search for strongly
lensed galaxies in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) imaging data. In this
study six strong lens systems are presented which we have confirmed with
follow-up spectroscopy and imaging using the 3.5m telescope at the Apache Point
Observatory. Preliminary mass models indicate that the lenses are group-scale
systems with velocity dispersions ranging from 466-878 km s^{-1} at z=0.17-0.45
which are strongly lensing source galaxies at z=0.4-1.4. Galaxy groups are a
relatively new mass scale just beginning to be probed with strong lensing. Our
sample of lenses roughly doubles the confirmed number of group-scale lenses in
the SDSS and complements ongoing strong lens searches in other imaging surveys
such as the CFHTLS (Cabanac et al 2007). As our arcs were discovered in the
SDSS imaging data they are all bright ($r\lesssim22$), making them ideally
suited for detailed follow-up studies.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Re-analysis of the First Fringe with 2-Beam in the VERA System from
  Archive Data
Authors: Makoto Miyoshi
Date: 2008-12-20T03:17:14Z
Abstract:   We report results from re-analysis of the visibility data of the first 2-beam
observations with VERA (VLBI Exploration of Radio Astrometry), previously
reported by Honma et al., 2003 (hereafter A2003). Independently we checked the
archival data and found the features noted in A2003 were not from the effect of
phase referencing by simultaneous differential VLBI but mainly from a removal
of large phase change by subtracting an arbitrary fitted curve to the phase
variations.
  The differential phase of the observed H2O masers between W49 North (W49N)
and OH~43.8-0.1 did not show a sinusoidal variation with a period of one
sidereal day due to a positional offset from the real celestial positions. We
therefore could not reproduce the results in A2003 by a normal positional
correction estimated from all time data, but could reproduce almost the same
phases only for the first hour by adjusting parameters. Using the parameters,
we could not suppress the large amount of phase variations for the successive
time data that A2003 did not show in their paper.
  It is appropriate to regard the analysis in A2003 as not being proper for
showing the performance of the instrument for phase referencing, which should
be demonstrated by other experiments observing several pairs of continuum
sources.


Category: astro-ph
Title: An Atlas For Interpreting Gamma-Ray Pulsar Light Curves
Authors: Kyle P. Watters, Roger W. Romani, Patrick Weltevrede, Simon Johnston
Date: 2008-12-20T02:40:57Z
Abstract:   We have simulated a population of young spin-powered pulsars and computed the
beaming pattern and lightcurves for the three main geometrical models: polar
cap emission, two-pole caustic ("slot gap") emission and outer magnetosphere
emission. The light curve shapes depend sensitively on the magnetic inclination
alpha and viewing angle zeta. We present the results as maps of observables
such as peak multiplicity and gamma-ray peak separation in the (alpha, zeta)
plane. These diagrams can be used to locate allowed regions for radio-loud and
radio-quiet pulsars and to convert observed fluxes to true all-sky emission.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Quantum Uncertainty Considerations for Gravitational Lens Interferometry
Authors: Laurance R. Doyle, David P. Carico
Date: 2008-12-19T23:41:03Z
Abstract:   The measurement of the gravitational lens delay time between light paths has
relied, to date, on the source having sufficient variability to allow
photometric variations from each path to be compared. However, the delay times
of many gravitational lenses cannot be measured because the intrinsic source
amplitude variations are too small to be detectable. At the fundamental quantum
mechanical level, such photometric time stamps allow which-path knowledge,
removing the ability to obtain an interference pattern. However, if the two
paths can be made equal (zero time delay) then interference can occur. We
describe an interferometric approach to measuring gravitational lens delay
times using a quantum-eraser/restorer approach, whereby the time travel along
the two paths may be rendered measurably equal. Energy and time being
non-commuting observables, constraints on the photon energy in the energy-time
uncertainty principle, via adjustments of the width of the radio bandpass,
dictate the uncertainty of the time delay and therefore whether the path taken
along one or the other gravitational lens geodesic is knowable. If one starts
with interference, for example, which-path information returns when the
bandpass is broadened (constraints on the energy are relaxed) to the point
where the uncertainty principle allows a knowledge of the arrival time to
better than the gravitational lens delay time itself, at which point the
interference will disappear. We discuss the near-term feasibility of such
measurements in light of current narrow-band radio detectors and known short
time-delay gravitational lenses.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Five ideas on black hole accretion disks
Authors: Marek A. Abramowicz
Date: 2008-12-19T23:41:03Z
Abstract:   I review five of Bohdan Paczynski's ideas on black hole accretion disk
theory. They formed my understanding of the subject and often guided intuition
in my research. They are fundamentally profound, rich in physical consequences,
mathematically elegant and clever, and in addition are useful in several
technically difficult practical applications.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Aspherical Core-Collapse Supernovae in Red Supergiants Powered by
  Nonrelativistic Jets
Authors: Sean M. Couch, J. Craig Wheeler, Milos Milosavljevic
Date: 2008-12-19T22:56:12Z
Abstract:   We explore the observational characteristics of jet-driven supernovae by
simulating bipolar-jet-driven explosions in a red supergiant progenitor. We
present results of four models in which we hold the injected kinetic energy at
a constant $10^{51}$ ergs across all jet models but vary the specific
characteristics of the jets to explore the influence of the nature of jets on
the structure of the supernova ejecta. We evolve the explosions past
shock-breakout and into quasi-homologous expansion of the supernova envelope
into a red supergiant wind. The oppositely-directed, nickel-rich jets give a
large-scale asymmetry that may account for the non-spherical excitation and
substructure of spectral lines such as H$\alpha$ and He I 10830\AA. Jets with a
large fraction of kinetic to thermal energy punch through the progenitor
envelope and give rise to explosions that would be observed to be asymmetric
from the earliest epochs, inconsistent with spectropolarimetric measurements of
Type II supernovae. Jets with higher thermal energy fractions result in
explosions that are roughly spherical at large radii but are significantly
elongated at smaller radii, deep inside the ejecta, in agreement with the
polarimetric observations. We present shock breakout light curves that indicate
that strongly aspherical shock breakouts are incompatible with recent {\it
GALEX} observations of shock breakout from red supergiant stars. Comparison
with observations indicates that jets must deposit their kinetic energy
efficiently throughout the ejecta while in the hydrogen envelope. Thermal
energy-dominated jets satisfy this criterion and yield many of the
observational characteristics of Type II supernovae.


Category: astro-ph
Title: On the release of binding energy and accretion power in core
  collapse-like environments
Authors: Aristotle Socrates, Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz
Date: 2008-12-19T22:55:59Z
Abstract:   All accretion models of gamma-ray bursts share a common assumption: accretion
power and gravitational binding energy is released and then dissipated locally,
with the mass of its origin. This is equivalent to the Shakura-Sunyaev 1973
(SS73) prescription for the dissipation of accretion power and subsequent
conversion into radiate output. Since their seminal paper, broadband
observations of quasars and black hole X-ray binaries insist that the SS73
prescription cannot wholly describe their behavior. In particular, optically
thick black hole accretion flows are almost universally accompanied by coronae
whose relative power by far exceeds anything seen in studies of stellar
chromospheric and coronal activity. In this note, we briefly discuss the
possible repercussions of freeing accretion models of GRBs from the SS73
prescription. Our main conclusion is that the efficiency of converting
gravitational binding energy into a GRB power can be increased by an order of
magnitude or more.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Two-Dimensional Transport of Solids in Viscous Protoplanetary Disks
Authors: Fred Ciesla
Date: 2008-12-19T22:55:47Z
Abstract:   Large-scale radial transport of solids appears to be a fundamental
consequence of protoplanetary disk evolution based on the presence of high
temperature minerals in comets and the outer regions of protoplanetary disks
around other stars. Further, inward transport of solids from the outer regions
of the solar nebula has been postulated to be the manner in which short-lived
radionuclides were introduced to the terrestrial planet region and the cause of
the variations in oxygen isotope ratios seen in primitive materials. Here, both
outward and inward transport of solids are investigated in the context of a
two-dimensional, viscously evolving protoplanetary disk. The dynamics of solids
are investigated to determine how they depend on particle size and the
particular stage of protoplanetary disk evolution, corresponding to different
rates of mass transport. It is found that the outward flows that arise around
the disk midplane of a protoplanetary disk aid in the outward transport of
solids up to the size of CAIs and can increase the crystallinity fraction of
silicate dust at 10 AU around a solar mass star to as much as $\sim$40% in the
case of rapidly evolving disks, decreasing as the accretion rate onto the star
slows. High velocity, inward flows along the disk surface aid in the rapid
transport of solids from the outer disk to the inner disk, particularly for
small dust. Despite the diffusion that occurs throughout the disk, the
large-scale, meridonal flows associated with mass transport prevent complete
homogenization of the disk, allowing compositional gradients to develop that
vary in intensity for a timescale of one million years.


Category: astro-ph
Title: An Accelerating Cosmology Without Dark Energy
Authors: G. Steigman, R. C. Santos, J. A. S. Lima
Date: 2008-12-19T22:38:58Z
Abstract:   The negative pressure accompanying gravitationally-induced particle creation
can lead to a cold dark matter (CDM) dominated, accelerating Universe (Lima et
al. 1996) without requiring the presence of dark energy or a cosmological
constant. In a recent study Lima et al. (2008, LSS) demonstrated that particle
creation driven cosmological models are capable of accounting for the SNIa
observations of the recent transition from a decelerating to an accelerating
Universe. Here we test the evolution of such models at high redshift using the
constraint on z_eq, the redshift of the epoch of matter radiation equality,
provided by the WMAP constraints on the early Integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect.
Since the contribution of baryons and radiation was ignored in the work of LSS,
we include them in our study of this class of models. The parameters of these
more realistic models with continuous creation of CDM is tested and constrained
at widely-separated epochs (z = z_eq and z = 0) in the evolution of the
Universe. This comparison reveals a tension between the high redshift CMB
constraint on z_eq and that which follows from the low redshift SNIa data,
challenging the viability of this class of models.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Coronal activity from the ASAS eclipsing binaries
Authors: D. M. Szczygiel, A. Socrates, B. Paczynski, G. Pojmanski, B. Pilecki
Date: 2008-12-19T22:21:39Z
Abstract:   We combine the catalogue of eclipsing binaries from the All Sky Automated
Survey (ASAS) with the ROSAT All Sky Survey (RASS). The combination results in
836 eclipsing binaries that display coronal activity and is the largest sample
of active binary stars assembled to date. By using the (V-I) colors of the ASAS
eclipsing binary catalogue, we are able to determine the distances and thus
bolometric luminosities for the majority of eclipsing binaries that display
significant stellar activity. A typical value for the ratio of soft X-ray to
bolometric luminosity is L_X/L_bol ~ a few x 10^-4, similar to the ratio of
soft X-ray to bolometric flux F_X/F_bol in the most active regions of the Sun.
Unlike rapidly rotating isolated late-type dwarfs -- stars with significant
outer convection zones -- a tight correlation between Rossby number and
activity of eclipsing binaries is absent. We find evidence for the saturation
effect and marginal evidence for the so-called "super-saturation" phenomena.
Our work shows that wide-field stellar variability searches can produce a high
yield of binary stars with strong coronal activity.
  The combined ASAS and RASS catalogue, as well as the results of this work are
available for download in a form of a file.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Cosmic ray driven dynamo in galactic disks. A parameter study
Authors: Michał Hanasz, Katarzyna Otmianowska-Mazur, Grzegorz Kowal, Harald Lesch
Date: 2008-12-19T22:07:08Z
Abstract:   We present a parameter study of the magnetohydrodynamical dynamo driven by
cosmic rays in the interstellar medium (ISM) focusing on the efficiency of
magnetic field amplification and the issue of energy equipartition between
magnetic, kinetic and cosmic ray (CR) energies. We perform numerical CR-MHD
simulations of the ISM using the extended version of ZEUS-3D code in the
shearing box approximation and taking into account the presence of Ohmic
resistivity, tidal forces and vertical disk gravity. CRs are supplied in
randomly distributed supernova (SN) remnants and are described by the
diffusion-advection equation, which incorporates an anisotropic diffusion
tensor. The azimuthal magnetic flux and total magnetic energy are amplified
depending on a particular choice of model parameters. We find that the most
favorable conditions for magnetic field amplification correspond to magnetic
diffusivity of the order of $3\times 10^{25} \cm^2\s^{-1}$, SN rates close to
those observed in the Milky Way, periodic SN activity corresponding to spiral
arms, and highly anisotropic and field-aligned CR diffusion. The rate of
magnetic field amplification is relatively insensitive to the magnitude of SN
rates in a rage of spanning 10% up to 100% of realistic values. The timescale
of magnetic field amplification in the most favorable conditions is 150 Myr, at
galactocentric radius equal to 5 kpc. The final magnetic field energies
fluctuate near equipartition with the gas kinetic energy. In all models CR
energy exceeds the equipartition values by a least an order of magnitude, in
contrary to the expected equipartition. We suggest that the excess of cosmic
rays can be attributed to the fact that the shearing-box does not permit cosmic
rays to leave the system along the horizontal magnetic field.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Evolution of Dark Matter Phase-Space Density Distributions in Equal-Mass
  Halo Mergers
Authors: Ileana M. Vass, Stelios Kazantzidis, Monica Valluri, Andrey V. Kravtsov
Date: 2008-12-19T20:54:21Z
Abstract:   We use dissipationless N-body simulations to investigate the evolution of the
true coarse-grained phase-space density distribution f(x,v) in equal-mass
mergers between dark matter (DM) halos. The halo models are constructed with
various asymptotic power-law indices ranging from steep cusps to core-like
profiles and we employ the phase-space density estimator ``Enbid'' developed by
Sharma & Steinmetz to compute f(x,v). The adopted force resolution allows
robust phase-space density profile estimates in the inner ~1% of the virial
radii of the simulated systems. We confirm that mergers result in a decrease of
the coarse-grained phase-space density in accordance with expectations from
Mixing Theorems for collisionless systems. We demonstrate that binary mergers
between identical DM halos produce remnants that retain excellent memories of
the inner slopes and overall shapes of the phase-space density distribution of
their progenitors. The robustness of the phase-space density profiles holds for
a range of orbital energies, and a variety of encounter configurations
including sequences of several consecutive merger events, designed to mimic
hierarchical merging, and collisions occurring at different cosmological
epochs. If the progenitor halos are constructed with appreciably different
asymptotic power-law indices, we find that the inner slope and overall shape of
the phase-space density distribution of the remnant are substantially closer to
that of the initial system with the steepest central density cusp. These
results explicitly demonstrate that mixing is incomplete in equal-mass mergers
between DM halos, as it does not erase memory of the progenitor properties. Our
results also confirm the recent analytical predictions of Dehnen (2005)
regarding the preservation of merging self-gravitating central density cusps.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Gamma-ray and Radio Constraints of High Positron Rate Dark Matter Models
  Annihilating into New Light Particles
Authors: Lars Bergstrom, Gianfranco Bertone, Torsten Bringmann, Joakim Edsjo, Marco Taoso
Date: 2008-12-19T20:54:12Z
Abstract:   The possibility of explaining the positron and electron excess recently found
by the PAMELA and ATIC collaborations in terms of dark matter (DM) annihilation
has attracted considerable attention. Models surviving bounds from, e.g,
antiproton production generally fall into two classes, where either DM
annihilates directly with a large branching fraction into light leptons, or, as
in the recent models of Arkani-Hamed et al., and of Nomura and Thaler, the
annihilation gives low-mass (pseudo)scalars or vectors $\phi$ which then decay
into $\mu^+\mu^-$ or $e^+e^-$. While the constraints on the first kind of
models have recently been treated by several authors, we study here
specifically models of the second type which rely on an efficient Sommerfeld
enhancement in order to obtain the necessary boost in the annihilation cross
section. We compute the photon flux generated by QED radiative corrections to
the decay of $\phi$ and show that this indeed gives a rather spectacular broad
peak in $E^2d\sigma/dE$, that for these extreme values of the cross section
violate gamma-ray observations of the Galactic center for DM density profiles
steeper than that of Navarro, Frenk and White. The most stringent constraint
comes from the comparison of the predicted synchrotron radiation in the central
part of the Galaxy with radio observations of Sgr A*. For the most commonly
adopted DM profiles, the models that provide a good fit to the PAMELA and ATIC
data are ruled out, unless there are physical processes that boost the local
anti-matter fluxes more than one order of magnitude, while not affecting the
gamma-ray or radio fluxes.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Unveiling the birth and evolution of the HII region Sh2-173
Authors: S. Cichowolski, G. A. Romero, M. E. Ortega, C. E. Cappa, J. Vasquez
Date: 2008-12-19T18:15:26Z
Abstract:   Based on a multiwavelength study, the ISM around the HII region Sh2-173 has
been analyzed. The ionized region is clearly detected in the optical and in the
radio continuum images. The analysis of the HI data shows a region of low
emissivity that has an excellent morphological correlation with the radio
continuum emission. The HII region is partially bordered by a photodissociation
region, which, in turn, is encircled by a molecular structure. Taking into
account the presence of noncircular motions in the Perseus spiral arm, together
with previous distance estimates for the region, we adopt a distance of 2.5 +-
0.5 kpc for Sh2-173. Seven hot stars were identified in the field of Sh2-173,
being only one an O-type star. The amount of energetic photons emitted by this
star is enough to keep the region ionized and heat the dust. Given that an
expanding HII region may trigger star formation, a search for YSO candidates
was made using different infrared point source catalogues. A population of 46
YSO candidates was identified projected onto the molecular clouds. On the other
hand, Sh2-173 is located in a dense edge of a large HI shell. The possibility
for Sh2-173 of being part of a hierarchical system of three generations is
suggested. The ages of both, the HII region and the large shell, were estimated
and compared. We concluded that Sh2-173 is a young HII region of about 0.6 -
1.0 Myr old. As for the large shell we obtained a dynamical age of 5 +- 1 Myr.
These age estimates, together with the relative location of the different
structures, support the hypothesis that Sh2-173 is part of a hierarchical
system.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Accelerated expansion and matter creation
Authors: Victor H. Cardenas
Date: 2008-12-19T18:02:55Z
Abstract:   A set of cosmological models that takes into account the variation of the
particle number is presented. In this context both dark matter and dark energy
can be explained using a single component, without assuming any exotic equation
of state, solving directly the cosmic coincidence problem.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A Comparison of Six Photometric Redshift Methods Applied to 1.5 Million
  Luminous Red Galaxies
Authors: Filipe B. Abdalla, Manda Banerji, Ofer Lahav, Valery Rashkov
Date: 2008-12-19T17:58:22Z
Abstract:   We present an updated version of MegaZ-LRG (Collister et al.,(2007)) with
photometric redshifts derived with the neural network method, ANNz as well as
five other publicly available photo-z codes (HyperZ, SDSS, Le PHARE, BPZ and
ZEBRA) for ~1.5 million Luminous Red Galaxies (LRGs) in SDSS DR6. This allows
us to identify how reliable codes are relative to each other if used as
described in their public release. We compare and contrast the relative merits
of each code using ~13000 spectroscopic redshifts from the 2SLAQ sample. We
find that the performance of each code depends on the figure of merit used to
assess it. As expected, the availability of a complete training set means that
the training method performs best in the intermediate redshift bins where there
are plenty of training objects. Codes such as Le PHARE, which use new observed
templates perform best in the lower redshift bins. All codes produce reasonable
photometric redshifts, the 1-sigma scatters ranging from 0.057 to 0.097 if
averaged over the entire redshift range. We also perform tests to check whether
a training set from a small region of the sky such as 2SLAQ produces biases if
used to train over a larger area of the sky. We conclude that this is not
likely to be a problem for future wide-field surveys. The complete photometric
redshift catalogue including redshift estimates and errors on these from all
six methods can be found at www.star.ucl.ac.uk/~mbanerji/MegaZLRGDR6/megaz.html


Category: astro-ph
Title: Large grains in disks around young stars: ATCA observations of WW Cha,
  RU Lup, and CS Cha
Authors: Dave Lommen, Sarah Maddison, Chris Wright, Ewine van Dishoeck, David Wilner, Tyler Bourke
Date: 2008-12-19T17:19:47Z
Abstract:   Grains in disks around young stars grow from interstellar submicron sizes to
planetesimals over the course of several Myr. Thermal emission of large grains
or pebbles can be best observed at cm wavelengths. However, other emission
mechanisms can contribute. We aim to determine the mechanisms of cm emission
for 3 T Tauri stars. WW Cha and RU Lup were recently found to have grain growth
at least up to mm sizes in their circumstellar disks. CS Cha has similar
indications for grain growth in its circumbinary disk. The T Tauri stars WW Cha
and RU Lup were monitored over several years at mm and cm wavelengths, using
ATCA. The new ATCA 7 mm system was also used to observe CS Cha. WW Cha was
detected on several occasions at 7 and 16 mm. We obtained one detection of WW
Cha at 3 cm and upper limits only at 6 cm. The emission at 16 mm was stable
over days, months and years, but the emission at 3 cm is found to be variable.
RU Lup was detected at 7 mm. It was observed at 16 mm 3 times and at 3 and 6 cm
4 times and found to be variable in all 3 wavebands. CS Cha was detected at 7
mm, but the S/N was too low to resolve the gap in the circumbinary disk. The
emission at 3, 7 and 16 mm for WW Cha is well explained by thermal emission
from mm and cm-sized pebbles. The cm spectral index is consistent with the
emission from an optically-thick ionised wind, but the high variability of the
cm emission points to a non-thermal contribution. The SEDs of RU Lup and CS Cha
from 1 to 7 mm are consistent with thermal emission from mm-sized grains. The
variability of the longer-wavelength emission for RU Lup and the negative
spectral index suggest non-thermal emission.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Gravitational lensing of stars orbiting the Massive Black Hole in the
  Galactic Center
Authors: Valerio Bozza, Luigi Mancini
Date: 2008-12-19T17:01:24Z
Abstract:   The existence of a massive black hole in the center of the Milky Way,
coinciding with the radio source Sgr A*, is being established on more and more
solid ground. In principle, this black hole, acting as a gravitational lens, is
able to bend the light emitted by stars moving within its neighborhood,
eventually generating secondary images. Extending a previous analysis of the
gravitational lensing phenomenology to a new set of 28 stars, whose orbits have
been well determined by recent observations, we have calculated all the
properties of their secondary images, including time and magnitude of their
luminosity peaks and their angular distances from the central black hole. The
best lensing candidate is represented by the star S6, since the magnitude of
its secondary image at the peak reaches K=20.8, with an angular separation of
0.3 mas from the central black hole, that is just at the borders of the
resolution limit in the K band of incoming astronomical instruments.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Updated Pre-Main Sequence tracks at low metallicities for 0.1< M/Mo<1.5
Authors: Di Criscienzo, P. Ventura, F. D'Antona
Date: 2008-12-19T16:52:16Z
Abstract:   Young populations at Z<Zo are being examined to understand the role of
metallicity in the first phases of stellar evolution. For the analysis it is
necessary to assign mass and age to Pre--Main Sequence (PMS) stars. While it is
well known that the mass and age determination of PMS stars is strongly
affected by the convection treatment, extending any calibration to
metallicities different from solar one is very artificial, in the absence of
any calibrators for the convective parameters. For solar abundance, Mixing
Lenght Theory models have been calibrated by using the results of 2D
radiative-hydrodynamical models (MLTa2D), that result to be very similar to
those computed with non-grey ATLAS9 atmosphere boundary condition and full
spectrum of turbolence (FST) convection model both in the atmosphere and in the
interior (NEMO--FST models). While MLTa2D models are not available for lower
metallicities, we extend to lower Z the NEMO--FST models, in the educated guess
that in such a way we are simulating also at smaller Z the results of MLTa2D.
We present PMS models for low mass stars from 0.1 to 1.5 Mo for metallicities
[Fe/H]= -0.5, -1.0 and -2.0. The calculations include the most recent interior
physics and the latest generation of non-grey atmosphere models. These
evolutionary tracks and isochrones are available in electronic form at a WEB
site http://www.mporzio.astro.it/%7Etsa/


Category: astro-ph
Title: Evidence for a hard equation of state in the cores of neutron stars
Authors: Chris Vuille
Date: 2008-12-19T16:31:23Z
Abstract:   The equation of state for matter with energy density above 2 x10^14 g/cm^3 is
parametrized by P = kN^Gamma, where N is the number density, Gamma is the
adiabatic index, and k a constant. Using this scheme to generate thousands of
models, together with data on neutron star masses, it is found, for a core
region with a constant adiabatic index, that the central density must satisfy
10^15 gm/cm^3 < rho_c < 10^16 gm/cm^3, with Gamma > 2.2. Further preliminary
results indicate, based on the observed neutrino flux from supernova 1987a,
that this number must be considerably higher, on the order of 3.5. These
results provide evidence for a hard equation of state in the cores of neutron
stars.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Long-term chromospheric activity of non-eclipsing RS CVn-type stars
Authors: Andrea P. Buccino, Pablo J. D. Mauas
Date: 2008-12-19T16:05:21Z
Abstract:   Context. The IUE database provides a large number of UV high and
low-resolution spectra of RS CVn-type stars from 1978 to 1996. In particular,
many of these stars were monitored continuously during several seasons by IUE.
Aims. Our main purpose is to study the short and long-term chromospheric
activity of the RS CVn systems most observed by IUE: HD 22468 (V711 Tau, HR
1099, K1IV+G5V), HD 21242 (UX Ari, K0IV+G5V) and HD 224085 (II Peg, K2IV).
Methods. We first obtain the Mount Wilson index S from the IUE high and
low-resolution spectra. Secondly, we analyse with the Lomb-Scargle periodogram
the mean annual index S and the amplitude of its rotational modulation.
Results. For HD 22468 (V711 Tau, HR 1099), we found a possible chromospheric
cycle with a period of 18 years and a shorter cycle with a period of 3 years,
which could be associated to a chromospheric "flip-flop" cycle. The data of HD
224085 (II Peg) also suggest a chromospheric cycle of 21 years and a flip-flop
cycle of 9 years. Finally, we obtained a possible chromospheric cycle of 7
years for HD 21242 (UX Ari).


Category: astro-ph
Title: The solar wind charge-transfer X-ray emission in the 1/4 keV energy
  range: inferences on Local Bubble hot gas at low Z
Authors: D. Koutroumpa, R. Lallement, J. C. Raymond, V. Kharchenko
Date: 2008-12-19T16:02:40Z
Abstract:   We present calculations of the heliospheric SWCX emission spectra and their
contributions in the ROSAT 1/4 keV band. We compare our results with the soft
X-ray diffuse background (SXRB) emission detected in front of 378 identified
shadowing regions during the ROSAT All-Sky Survey (Snowden et al. 2000). This
foreground component is principally attributed to the hot gas of the so-called
Local Bubble (LB), an irregularly shaped cavity of ~50-150 pc around the Sun,
which is supposed to contain ~10^6 K plasma. Our results suggest that the SWCX
emission from the heliosphere is bright enough to account for most of the
foreground emission towards the majority of low galactic latitude directions,
where the LB is the least extended. In a large part of directions with galactic
latitude above 30deg the heliospheric SWCX intensity is significantly smaller
than the measured one. However, the SWCX R2/R1 band ratio differs slightly from
the data in the galactic center direction, and more significantly in the
galactic anti-centre direction where the observed ratio is the smallest.
Assuming that both SWCX and hot gas emission are present and their relative
contributions vary with direction, we tested a series of thermal plasma spectra
for temperatures ranging from 10^5 to 10^6.5 K and searched for a combination
of SWCX spectra and thermal emission matching the observed intensities and band
ratios, while simultaneously being compatible with O VI emission measurements.
In the frame of collisional equilibrium models and for solar abundances, the
range we derive for hot gas temperature and emission measure cannot reproduce
the Wisconsin C/B band ratio. We emphasize the need for additional atomic data,
describing consistently EUV and X-ray photon spectra of the charge-exchange
emission of heavier solar wind ions.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Discovery of fossil magnetic fields in the intermediate-mass pre-main
  sequence stars
Authors: E. Alecian, G. A. Wade, C. Catala
Date: 2008-12-19T15:10:24Z
Abstract:   It is now well-known that the surface magnetic fields observed in cool,
lower-mass stars on the main sequence (MS) are generated by dynamos operating
in their convective envelopes. However, higher-mass stars (above 1.5 Msun) pass
their MS lives with a small convective core and a largely radiative envelope.
Remarkably, notwithstanding the absence of energetically-important envelope
convection, we observe very strong (from 300 G to 30 kG) and organised (mainly
dipolar) magnetic fields in a few percent of the A and B-type stars on the MS,
the origin of which is not well understood. In this poster we propose that
these magnetic fields could be of fossil origin, and we present very strong
observational results in favour of this proposal.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Power Asymmetry in Cosmic Microwave Background Fluctuations from Full
  Sky to Sub-degree Scales: Is the Universe Isotropic?
Authors: F. K. Hansen, A. J. Banday, K. M. Gorski, H. K. Eriksen, P. B. Lilje
Date: 2008-12-19T14:47:26Z
Abstract:   We repeat and extend the analysis of Eriksen et al 2004 and Hansen et al 2004
testing the isotropy of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) fluctuations. We
find that the hemispherical power asymmetry previously reported for the largest
scales l=2-40 extend to much smaller scales. In fact, for the full multipole
range l=2-600, significantly more power is found in the hemisphere centered at
(theta=107 deg., phi=226 deg.) in galactic co-latitude and longitude than in
the opposite hemisphere consistent with the previously detected direction of
asymmetry for l=2-40. We adopt a model selection test where the direction and
amplitude of asymmetry as well as the multipole range are free parameters. A
model with an asymmetric distribution of power for l=2-600 is found to be
preferred over the isotropic model at the 0.4% significance level taking into
account the additional parameters required to describe it. A similar direction
of asymmetry is found independently in all six subranges of 100 multipoles
between l=2-600 and none of our 9800 isotropic simulated maps show a similarly
consistent direction of asymmetry over such a large multipole range. No known
systematic effects or foregrounds are found to be able to explain the
asymmetry.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Liquid metal experiments on the helical magnetorotational instability
Authors: Frank Stefani, Gunter Gerbeth, Thomas Gundrum, Jacek Szklarski, Guenther Ruediger, Rainer Hollerbach
Date: 2008-12-19T14:04:42Z
Abstract:   The magnetorotational instability (MRI) plays an essential role in the
formation of stars and black holes. By destabilizing hydrodynamically stable
Keplerian flows, the MRI triggers turbulence and enables outward transport of
angular momentum in accretion discs. We present the results of a liquid metal
Taylor-Couette experiment under the influence of helical magnetic fields that
show typical features of MRI at Reynolds numbers of the order 1000 and Hartmann
numbers of the order 10. Particular focus is laid on an improved experiment in
which split end caps are used to minimize the Ekman pumping.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Morphology and hardness ratio exploitation under limited statistics
Authors: A. -C. Clapson, M. Dyrda, D. Nekrassov, M. Renaud
Date: 2008-12-19T13:41:55Z
Abstract:   Gamma-ray astronomy has produced for several years now sky maps for low
photon statistics, non-negligible background and comparatively poor angular
resolution. Quantifying the significance of spatial features remains difficult.
Besides, spectrum extraction requires regions with large statistics while maps
in energy bands allow only qualitative interpretation. The two main competing
mechanisms in the VHE domain are the Inverse-Compton emission from accelerated
electrons radiating through synchrotron in the X-ray domain and the
interactions between accelerated hadrons and the surrounding medium, leading to
the production and subsequent decay of Pi0 mesons. The spectrum of the VHE
emission from leptons is predicted to steepen with increasing distance from the
acceleration zone, owing to synchrotron losses (i.e. cooled population). It
would remain approximately constant for hadrons. Ideally, spectro-imaging
analysis would have the same spatial scale in the TeV and X-ray domains, to
distinguish the local emission mechanisms. More realistically, we investigate
here the possibility of improving upon the currently published HESS results by
using more sophisticated tools.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Chemical evolution of high-mass stars in close binaries. I. The
  eclipsing binary V453 Cygni
Authors: K. Pavlovski, J. Southworth
Date: 2008-12-19T12:10:35Z
Abstract:   The eclipsing and double-lined spectroscopic binary system V453 Cygni
consists of two early B-type stars, one of which is nearing the terminal age
main sequence and one which is roughly halfway through its main sequence
lifetime. Accurate measurements of the masses and radii of the two stars are
available, which makes a detailed abundance analysis both more interesting and
more precise than for isolated stars. We have reconstructed the spectra of the
individual components of V453 Cyg from the observed composite spectra using the
technique of spectral disentangling. From these disentangled spectra we have
obtained improved effective temperature measurements of 27900 +/- 400 K and
26200 +/- 500 K, for the primary and secondary stars respectively, by fitting
non-LTE theoretical line profiles to the hydrogen Balmer lines. Armed with
these high-precision effective temperatures and the accurately known surface
gravities of the stars we have obtained the abundances of helium and metallic
elements. A detailed abundance analysis of the primary star shows a normal
(solar) helium abundance if the microturbulence velocity derived from metallic
lines is used. The elemental abundances show no indication that CNO-processed
material is present in the photosphere of this high-mass terminal age main
sequence star. The elemental abundances of the secondary star were derived by
differential study against a template spectrum of a star with similar
characteristics. Both the primary and secondary components display elemental
abundances which are in the ranges observed in the Galactic OB stars.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Simultaneous H.E.S.S. and Chandra observations of Sagittarius A* during
  an X-ray flare
Authors: H. E. S. S. Collaboration,  :, F. Aharonian
Date: 2008-12-19T11:44:38Z
Abstract:   The rapidly varying (~10 minute timescale) non-thermal X-ray emission
observed from Sgr A* implies that particle acceleration is occuring close to
the event horizon of the supermassive black hole. The TeV gamma-ray source HESS
J1745-290 is coincident with Sgr A* and may be closely related to its X-ray
emission. Simultaneous X-ray and TeV observations are required to elucidate the
relationship between these objects. We report on joint H.E.S.S./Chandra
observations performed in July 2005, during which an X-ray flare was detected.
Despite a factor of 9 increase in the X-ray flux of Sgr A*, no evidence is
found for an increase in the TeV gamma-ray flux from this region. We find that
an increase in the gamma-ray flux of a factor of 2 or greater can be excluded
at a confidence level of 99%. This finding disfavours scenarios in which the
keV and TeV emission are associated with the same population of accelerated
particles and in which the bulk of the gamma-ray emission is produced within
~10^{14} cm (~100 R_S) of the supermassive black hole.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Time-evolution of Peak Energy and Luminosity Relation within Pulses for
  GRB 061007: Probing Fireball Dynamics
Authors: Masanori Ohno, Kunihito Ioka, Kazutaka Yamaoka, Makoto Tashiro, Yasushi Fukazawa, Yujin E. Nakagawa
Date: 2008-12-19T11:28:42Z
Abstract:   We perform a time-resolved spectral analysis of bright, long Gamma-ray burst
GRB 061007 using Suzaku/WAM and Swift/BAT. Thanks to the large effective area
of the WAM, we can investigate the time evolution of the spectral peak energy,
Et_peak and the luminosity Lt_iso with 1-sec time resolution, and we find that
luminosity Lt_iso with 1-sec time resolution, and we find that the
time-resolved pulses also satisfy the Epeak-Liso relation, which was found for
the time-averaged spectra of other bursts, suggesting the same physical
conditions in each pulse. Furthermore, the initial rising phase of each pulse
could be an outlier of this relation with higher Et_peak value by about factor
2. This difference could suggest that the fireball radius expands by a factor
of 2-4 and/or bulk Lorentz factor of the fireball is decelerated by a factor of
4 during the initial phase, providing a new probe of the fireball dynamics in
real time.


Category: astro-ph
Title: A multiwavelength investigation of the massive eclipsing binary Cyg OB2
  #5
Authors: N. Linder, G. Rauw, J. Manfroid, Y. Damerdji, M. De Becker, P. Eenens, P. Royer, J. -M. Vreux
Date: 2008-12-19T10:46:40Z
Abstract:   The properties of the early-type binary Cyg OB2 #5 have been debated for many
years and spectroscopic and photometric investigations yielded conflicting
results. We have attempted to constrain the physical properties of the binary
by collecting new optical and X-ray observations. We find that the orbital
period of the system slowly changes though we are unable to discriminate
between several possible explanations of this trend. The best fit solution of
the continuum light curve reveals a contact configuration with the secondary
star being significantly brighter and hotter on its leading side facing the
primary. The mean temperature of the secondary star turns out to be only
slightly lower than that of the primary, whilst the bolometric luminosity ratio
is found to be 3.1. The solution of the light curve yields a distance of 925
+/- 25 pc much lower than the usually assumed distance of the Cyg OB2
association. Whilst we confirm the existence of episodes of higher X-ray
fluxes, the data reveal no phase-locked modulation with the 6.6 day period of
the eclipsing binary nor any clear relation between the X-ray flux and the 6.7
yr radio cycle. The bright region of the secondary star is probably heated by
energy transfer in a common envelope in this contact binary system as well as
by the collision with the primary's wind. The existence of a common photosphere
probably also explains the odd mass-luminosity relation of the stars in this
system. Most of the X-ray, non-thermal radio, and possibly gamma-ray emission
of Cyg OB2 #5 is likely to arise from the interaction of the combined wind of
the eclipsing binary with at least one additional star of this multiple system.


Category: astro-ph
Title: An Explicit Scheme for Incorporating Ambipolar Diffusion in a
  Magnetohydrodynamics Code
Authors: Eunwoo Choi, Jongsoo Kim, Paul J. Wiita
Date: 2008-12-19T10:45:00Z
Abstract:   We describe a method for incorporating ambipolar diffusion in the strong
coupling approximation into a multidimensional magnetohydrodynamics code based
on the total variation diminishing scheme. Contributions from ambipolar
diffusion terms are included by explicit finite difference operators in a fully
unsplit way, maintaining second order accuracy. The divergence-free condition
of magnetic fields is exactly ensured at all times by a flux-interpolated
constrained transport scheme. The super time stepping method is used to
accelerate the timestep in high resolution calculations and/or in strong
ambipolar diffusion. We perform two test problems, the steady-state oblique
C-type shocks and the decay of Alfv\'en waves, confirming the accuracy and
robustness of our numerical approach. Results from the simulations of the
compressible MHD turbulence with ambipolar diffusion show the flexibility of
our method as well as its ability to follow complex MHD flows in the presence
of ambipolar diffusion. These simulations show that the dissipation rate of MHD
turbulence is strongly affected by the strength of ambipolar diffusion.


Category: astro-ph
Title: Maxwell-Kostelecký Electromagnetism and Cosmic Magnetization
Authors: L. Campanelli, P. Cea
Date: 2008-12-19T10:27:06Z
Abstract:   The Lorentz violating term in the photon sector of Standard Model Extension,
$\mathcal{L}_K = -{$\frac14$} (k_F)_{\alpha \beta \mu \nu} F^{\alpha \beta}
F^{\mu \nu}$ (here referred to as the Kosteleck\'{y} term), breaks conformal
invariance of electromagnetism and enables a superadiabatic amplification of
magnetic vacuum fluctuations during inflation. For a wide range of values of
parameters defining Lorentz symmetry violation and inflation, the present-day
magnetic field can have an intensity of order of nanogauss on megaparsec scales
and then could explain the large-scale magnetization of the universe.


Category: astro-ph
Title: The Galactic bulge as seen in optical surveys
Authors: C. Reyle, D. J. Marshall, M. Schultheis, A. C. Robin
Date: 2008-12-19T10:13:09Z
Abstract:   The bulge is a region of the Galaxy of tremendous interest for understanding
galaxy formation. However measuring photometry and kinematics in it raises
several inherent issues, such as severe crowding and high extinction in the
visible. Using the Besancon Galaxy model and a 3D extinction map, we estimate
the stellar density as a function of longitude, latitude and apparent magnitude
and we deduce the possibility of reaching and measuring bulge stars with Gaia.
We also present an ongoing analysis of the bulge using the Canada-France-Hawaii
Telescope.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Quantum-magneto oscillations in a supramolecular Mn(II)-[3 x 3] grid
Authors: O. Waldmann, S. Carretta, P. Santini, R. Koch, A. G. M. Jansen, G. Amoretti, R. Caciuffo, L. Zhao, L. K. Thompson
Date: 2004-01-16T19:00:30Z
Abstract:   The magnetic grid molecule Mn(II)-[3 x 3] has been studied by high-field
torque magnetometry at 3He temperatures. At fields above 5 T, the torque vs.
field curves exhibit an unprecedented oscillatory behavior. A model is proposed
which describes these magneto oscillations well.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Ferromagnetism in Fe-doped SnO2 thin films
Authors: J. M. D. Coey, A. P. Douvalis, C. B. Fitzgerald, M. Venkatesan
Date: 2004-01-16T17:22:17Z
Abstract:   Thin films grown by pulsed-laser deposition from targets of Sn0.95Fe0.05O2
are transparent ferromagnets with Curie temperature and spontaneous
magnetization of 610 K and 2.2 Am2kg-1, respectively. The 57Fe Mossbauer
spectra show the iron is all high-spin Fe3+ but the films are magnetically
inhomogeneous on an atomic scale, with only 23 % of the iron ordering
magnetically. The net ferromagnetic moment per ordered iron ion, 1.8 Bohr
magnetons, is greater than for any simple iron oxide. Ferromagnetic coupling of
ferric ions via an electron trapped in a bridging oxygen vacancy (F center) is
proposed to explain the high Curie temperature


Category: cond-mat
Title: Ultrafast Conductivity Dynamics in Pentacene Probed using Terahertz
  Spectroscopy
Authors: V. K. Thorsmolle, R. D. Averitt, X. Chi, D. J. Hilton, D. L. Smith, A. P. Ramirez, A. J. Taylor
Date: 2004-01-16T16:51:55Z
Abstract:   We present measurements of the transient photoconductivity in pentacene
single crystals using optical-pump THz-probe spectroscopy. We have measured the
temperature and fluence dependence of the mobility of the photoexcited charge
carriers with picosecond resolution. The pentacene crystals were excited at 3.0
eV which is above the bandgap of ~2.2 eV and the induced change in the
far-infrared transmission was measured. At 30 K, the carrier mobility is mu ~
0.4 cm^2/Vs and decreases to mu ~ 0.2 cm^2/Vs at room temperature. The
transient terahertz signal reveals the presence of free carriers that are
trapped on the timescale of a few ps or less, possibly through the formation of
excitons, small polarons, or trapping by impurities.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Phases of a rotating Bose-Einstein condensate with anharmonic
  confinement
Authors: A. D. Jackson, G. M. Kavoulakis, E. Lundh
Date: 2004-01-16T16:25:27Z
Abstract:   We examine an effectively repulsive Bose-Einstein condensate of atoms that
rotates in a quadratic-plus-quartic potential. With use of a variational method
we identify the three possible phases of the system (multiple quantization,
single quantization, and a mixed phase) as a function of the rotational
frequency of the gas and of the coupling constant. The derived phase diagram is
shown to be universal and the continuous transitions to be exact in the limit
of weak coupling and small anharmonicity. The variational results are found to
be consistent with numerical solutions of the Gross-Pitaevskii equation.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Observation of narrow fluorescence from doubly driven four-level atoms
  at room temperature
Authors: Uday Kumar Khan, Jimmy Sebastian, N. Kamaraju, Andal Narayanan, R. Srinivasan, Hema Ramachandran
Date: 2004-01-16T10:04:40Z
Abstract:   Unusually narrow fluorescence peaks are seen from Rubidium-85 atoms under the
action of two driving laser fields that are in a three dimensional molasses
configuration. One of the lasers is held at a fixed detuning from the "cooling"
transition, while the other is scanned across the "repumping" transitions. The
fluorescence peaks are split into symmetric pairs, with the seperation within a
pair increasing with the detuning of the cooling laser. For large detunings
additional small peaks are seen. A simple model is proposed to explain these
experimental observations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Fluorescence from doubly driven four-level atoms - A density matrix
  approach
Authors: Andal Narayanan, R. Srinivasan, Ashok Vudayagiri, Uday Kumar Khan, Hema Ramachandran
Date: 2004-01-16T09:32:26Z
Abstract:   The unusually narrow features in the fluorescence from Rubidium-85 driven by
cooling and repumper laser fields, reported in an earlier experiment [1] are
explained on the basis of a four-level density matrix calculation. Quantum
effects alter the efficiency of atom transfer by the probe (repumper) laser to
the levels connected by the pump (cooling) laser. This combined with the double
resonance condition [1], results in velocity selection from co-propagating and
counter propagating probe and pump beams resulting in narrow fluorescence peaks
from a thermal gas at room temperature.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Optical conductivity of small adiabatic polarons with a long-range
  electron-phonon interaction
Authors: B. Ya. Yavidov
Date: 2004-01-15T18:48:08Z
Abstract:   The hopping of an electron, interacting with many ions of a lattice via the
long-range (Fr\"{o}hlich) electron-phonon interaction and optical absorption
are studied at zero temperature. Ions are assumed to be isotropic
three-dimensional oscillators. The optical conductivity and a renormalized mass
of small adiabatic Fr\"{o}hlich polarons is calculated and compared with those
of small adiabatic Holstein polarons.


Category: cond-mat
Title: A first principles simulation of rigid water
Authors: M. Allesch, E. Schwegler, F. Gygi, G. Galli
Date: 2004-01-15T17:08:28Z
Abstract:   We present the results of Car-Parrinello (CP) simulations of water at ambient
conditions and under pressure, using a rigid molecule approximation. Throughout
our calculations, water molecules were maintained at a fixed intramolecular
geometry corresponding to the average structure obtained in fully unconstrained
simulations. This allows us to use larger time steps than those adopted in
ordinary CP simulations of water, and thus to access longer time scales. In the
absence of chemical reactions or dissociation effects, these calculations open
the way to ab initio simulations of aqueous solutions that require timescales
substantially longer than presently feasible (e.g. simulations of hydrophobic
solvation). Our results show that structural properties and diffusion
coefficients obtained with a rigid model are in better agreement with
experiment than those determined with fully flexible simulations. Possible
reasons responsible for this improved agreement are discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Origin of asymmetric reversal modes in ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic
  multilayers
Authors: B. Beckmann, U. Nowak, K. D. Usadel
Date: 2004-01-14T10:29:13Z
Abstract:   Experimentally an asymmetry of the reversal modes has been found in certain
exchange bias systems. From a numerical investigation of the domain state model
evidence is gained that this effect depends on the angle between the easy axis
of the antiferromagnet and the applied magnetic field. Depending on this angle
the ferromagnet reverses either symmetrically, e. g. by a coherent rotation on
both sides of the loop, or the reversal is asymmetric with a non uniform
reversal mode for the ascending branch, which may even yield a zero
perpendicular magnetization.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Vortex waves and the onset of turbulence in $^3$He-B
Authors: K. L. Henderson, C. F. Barenghi
Date: 2004-01-13T12:34:18Z
Abstract:   In a recent experiment Finne et al. discovered an intrinsic condition for the
onset of quantum turbulence in $^3$He-B, that q=alpha/(1-alpha')<1, where alpha
and alpha' are mutual friction parameters. The authors argued that this
condition corresponds to Kelvin waves which are marginally damped, so for q>1
Kelvin waves cannot grow in amplitude and trigger vortex reconnections and
turbulence. By analysing both axisymmetric and non-axisymmetric modes of
oscillations of a rotating superfluid, we confirm that in the long axial
wavelength limit the simple condition q=1 is indeed the crossover between
damped and propagating Kelvin waves.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Charge detection enables free-electron quantum computation
Authors: C. W. J. Beenakker, D. P. DiVincenzo, C. Emary, M. Kindermann
Date: 2004-01-12T18:49:43Z
Abstract:   It is known that a quantum computer operating on electron-spin qubits with
single-electron Hamiltonians and assisted by single-spin measurements can be
simulated efficiently on a classical computer. We show that the exponential
speed-up of quantum algorithms is restored if single-charge measurements are
added. These enable the construction of a CNOT (controlled NOT) gate for free
fermions, using only beam splitters and spin rotations. The gate is nearly
deterministic if the charge detector counts the number of electrons in a mode,
and fully deterministic if it only measures the parity of that number.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Testing Option Pricing with the Edgeworth Expansion
Authors: Ruy Gabriel Balieiro Filho, Rogerio Rosenfeld
Date: 2004-01-12T17:44:12Z
Abstract:   There is a well developed framework, the Black-Scholes theory, for the
pricing of contracts based on the future prices of certain assets, called
options. This theory assumes that the probability distribution of the returns
of the underlying asset is a gaussian distribution. However, it is observed in
the market that this hypothesis is flawed, leading to the introduction of a
fudge factor, the so-called volatility smile. Therefore, it would be
interesting to explore extensions of the Black-Scholes theory to non-gaussian
distributions. In this contribution we provide an explicit formula for the
price of an option when the distributions of the returns of the underlying
asset is parametrized by an Edgeworth expansion, which allows for the
introduction of higher independent moments of the probability distribution,
namely skewness and kurtosis. We test our formula with options in the brazilian
and american markets, showing that the volatility smile can be reduced. We also
check whether our approach leads to more efficient hedging strategies of these
instruments.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Complexity in cosmic structures
Authors: Francesco Sylos Labini, Andrea Gabrielli
Date: 2004-01-12T15:35:00Z
Abstract:   We discuss correlation properties of a general mass density field introducing
a classification of structures based on their complexity. Standard cosmological
models for primordial mass fluctuations are characterized by a sort of
large-scale stochastic order, that we call super-homogeneity to highlight the
fact that mass fluctuations increase as a function of scale in the slowest
possible way for any stochastic mass field. On the other hand the galaxy
spatial distribution show complex structures with a high degree of
inhomogeneity and fractal-like spatial correlations up to some relevant
cosmological scale. The theoretical problem of cosmological structure formation
should then explain the growth of strongly correlated and non-linear structures
from the very uniform field of density fluctuations given as standard initial
condition.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamical mechanism of anticipating synchronization in excitable systems
Authors: Marzena Ciszak, Francesco Marino, Raul Toral, Salvador Balle
Date: 2004-01-12T11:20:19Z
Abstract:   We analyze the phenomenon of anticipating synchronization of two excitable
systems with unidirectional delayed coupling which are subject to the same
external forcing. We demonstrate for different paradigms of excitable system
that, due to the coupling, the excitability threshold for the slave system is
always lower than that for the master. As a consequence the two systems respond
to a common external forcing with different response times. This allows to
explain in a simple way the mechanism behind the phenomenon of anticipating
synchronization.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Skyrmion formation in 1+1 dimensions with chemical potential
Authors: V. Sunil Kumar, Biswanath Layek, Soma Sanyal, Ajit M. Srivastava, Vivek K. Tiwari
Date: 2004-01-12T08:32:44Z
Abstract:   Formation of topological objects during phase transitions has been discussed
extensively in literature. In all these discussions defects and anti-defects
form with equal probabilities. In contrast, many physical situations, such as
formation of baryons in relativistic heavy-ion collisions at present energies,
flux tube formation in superconductors in the presence of external magnetic
field, and formation of superfluid vortices in a rotating vessel, require a
mechanism which can bias (say) defects over anti-defects. Such a bias can
crucially affect defect-anti-defect correlations, apart from its effects on
defect density. In this paper we initiate an investigation for the basic
mechanism of biased formation of defects. For Skyrmions in 1+1 dimensions, we
show that incorporation of a chemical potential term in the effective potential
leads to a domain structure where order parameter is spatially varying. We show
that this leads to biased formation of Skyrmions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Spin Transport in Two Dimensional Hopping Systems
Authors: T. Damker, H. Boettger, V. V. Bryksin
Date: 2004-01-12T07:22:13Z
Abstract:   A two dimensional hopping system with Rashba spin-orbit interaction is
considered. Our main interest is concerned with the evolution of the spin
degree of freedom of the electrons. We derive the rate equations governing the
evolution of the charge density and spin polarization of this system in the
Markovian limit in one-particle approximation. If only two-site hopping events
are taken into account, the evolution of the charge density and of the spin
polarization is found to be decoupled. A critical electric field is found,
above which oscillations are superimposed on the temporal decay of the total
polarization. A coupling between charge density and spin polarization occurs on
the level of three-site hopping events. The coupling terms are identified as
the anomalous Hall effect and the recently proposed spin Hall effect. Thus, an
unpolarized charge current through a sheet of finite width leads to a
transversal spin accumulation in our model system.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Linear and nonlinear dynamics of matter wave packets in periodic
  potentials
Authors: Th. Anker, M. Albiez, B. Eiermann, M. Taglieber, M. K. Oberthaler
Date: 2004-01-10T22:29:21Z
Abstract:   We investigate experimentally and theoretically the nonlinear propagation of
87Rb Bose Einstein condensates in a trap with cylindrical symmetry. An
additional weak periodic potential which encloses an angle with the symmetry
axis of the waveguide is applied. The observed complex wave packet dynamics
results from the coupling of transverse and longitudinal motion. We show that
the experimental observations can be understood applying the concept of
effective mass, which also allows to model numerically the three dimensional
problem with a one dimensional equation. Within this framework the observed
slowly spreading wave packets are a consequence of the continuous change of
dispersion. The observed splitting of wave packets is very well described by
the developed model and results from the nonlinear effect of transient
solitonic propagation.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Langevin equation with scale-dependent noise
Authors: M. V. Altaisky
Date: 2004-01-10T19:42:51Z
Abstract:   A new wavelet based technique for the perturbative solution of the Langevin
equation is proposed. It is shown that for the random force acting in a limited
band of scales the proposed method directly leads to a finite result with no
renormalization required. The one-loop contribution to the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang
equation Green function for the interface growth is calculated as an example.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Wave turbulence and Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: Christophe Josserand
Date: 2004-01-09T13:44:12Z
Abstract:   Asymptotic behavior of a class of nonlinear Schr\"odinger equations are
studied. Particular cases of 1D weakly focusing and Bose-Einstein condensates
are considered. A statistical approach is presented to describe the stationary
probability density of a discretized finite system. Using a maximum entropy
argument, the theory predicts that the statistical equilibrium is described by
energy equivalued fluctuation modes around the coherent structure minimizing
the Hamiltonian of the system. Good quantitative agreement is found with
numerical simulations. In particular, the particle number spectral density
follows an effective $1/k^2$ law for the asymptotic large time averaged
solutions. Transient dynamics from a given initial condition to the
statistically steady regime shows rapid oscillation of the condensate.


Category: cond-mat
Title: EMS Measurement of the Valence Spectral Function of Silicon - a test of
  Many-body Theory
Authors: C. Bowles, A. S. Kheifets, V. A. Sashin, M. Vos, E. Weigold
Date: 2004-01-08T23:13:18Z
Abstract:   The spectral function A(q,omega) of silicon has been measured along a number
of symmetry directions using high-energy high-resolution electron momentum
spectroscopy. It is compared with first-principles calculations based on the
interacting one-electron Green's function which is evaluated in the GW and the
cumulant expansion approximations. Positions of the quasiparticle peaks
(dispersion), their widths (lifetimes), and the extensive satellite structures
are measured over a broad range of energies and momenta. The band dispersions
are well described by both calculations, but the satellite predicted by the GW
calculation is not observed. Unlike the GW calculation, the cumulant expansion
calculation gives a significantly better description of the shape and momentum
dependence of the satellite structure, presenting a promising approach for
studying high-energy excitations.The spectral function A(q,omega) of silicon
has been measured along a number of symmetry directions using high-energy
high-resolution electron momentum spectroscopy. It is compared with
first-principles calculations based on the interacting one-electron Green's
function which is evaluated in the GW and the cumulant expansion
approximations. Positions of the quasiparticle peaks (dispersion), their widths
(lifetimes), and the extensive satellite structures are measured over a broad
range of energies and momentum dependence of the satellite structure,
presenting a promising approach for studying high-energy excitations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Large stock price changes: volume or liquidity?
Authors: Philipp Weber, Bernd Rosenow
Date: 2004-01-08T20:57:02Z
Abstract:   We analyze large stock price changes of more than five standard deviations
for i) TAQ data for the year 1997 and ii) order book data from the Island ECN
for the year 2002. We argue that large price changes are not due to large
trading volumes. Instead, we find that extreme price fluctuations are mainly
caused by a low density of limit orders stored in the order book, i.e. a small
liquidity.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Does the interaction potential determine both the fragility of a liquid
  and the vibrational properties of its glassy state?
Authors: P. Bordat, F. Affouard, M. Descamps, K. L. Ngai
Date: 2004-01-08T09:30:37Z
Abstract:   By performing molecular dynamics simulations of binary Lennard-Jones systems
with three different potentials, we show that increase of anharmonicity and
capacity for intermolecular coupling of the potential is the cause of (i) the
increase of kinetic fragility and nonexponentiality in the liquid state, (ii)
the Tg-scaled temperature dependence of the nonergodicity parameter determined
by the vibrations at low temperatures in the glassy state. Naturally these
parameters correlate with each other, as observed experimentally by T. Scopigno
et al., Science 302, 849 (2003).


Category: cond-mat
Title: Simulation of Phonon-Polariton Generation and Propagation in
  Ferroelectric LiNbO3 Crystals
Authors: David W. Ward, Eric Statz, Nikolay Stoyanov, Keith A. Nelson
Date: 2004-01-07T14:35:45Z
Abstract:   We simulate propagation of phonon-polaritons (admixtures of polar lattice
vibrations and electromagnetic waves) in ferroelectric LiNbO3 with a model that
consists of a spatially periodic array of harmonic oscillators coupled to THz
electromagnetic waves through an electric dipole moment. We show that when this
model is combined with the auxiliary differential equation method of finite
difference time domain (FDTD) simulations, the salient features of
phonon-polaritons may be illustrated. Further, we introduce second order
nonlinear coupling to an optical field to demonstrate phonon-polariton
generation by impulsive stimulated Raman scattering (ISRS). The
phonon-polariton dispersion relation in bulk ferroelectric LiNbO3 is determined
from simulation.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Optimised Traffic Flow at a Single Intersection: Traffic Responsive
  signalisation
Authors: M. Ebrahim Fouladvand, Zeinab Sadjadi, M. Reza Shaebani
Date: 2004-01-07T08:16:26Z
Abstract:   We propose a stochastic model for the intersection of two urban streets. The
vehicular traffic at the intersection is controlled by a set of traffic lights
which can be operated subject to fix-time as well as traffic adaptive schemes.
Vehicular dynamics is simulated within the framework of the probabilistic
cellular automata and the delay experienced by the traffic at each individual
street is evaluated for specified time intervals. Minimising the total delay of
both streets gives rise to the optimum signalisation of traffic lights. We
propose some traffic responsive signalisation algorithms which are based on the
concept of cut-off queue length and cut-off density.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Lattice dynamical study of optical modes in Tl2Mn2O7 and In2Mn2O7
  pyrochlores
Authors: Sonal Brown, H. C. Gupta, J. A. Alonso, M. J. Martinez-Lope
Date: 2004-01-07T07:14:44Z
Abstract:   The Raman, IR and force field have been investigated for A2Mn2O7 (A= Tl, In)
by means of a short-range force constant model which includes four stretching
and four bending force constants. Unusual spectral and force field changes are
observed and analyzed. The stretching force constant Mn-O and A-O, are found to
be relatively higher than those of other pyrochlore oxides of the A2Mn2O7
family, while the remaining force constant values are significantly smaller,
especially for Tl2Mn2O7. This trend may be due to strong hybridization of the
Tl (6s) orbital with O (2p) and Mn (3d). The assignment of all the modes has
been proposed and potential energy distribution is also reported. The evaluated
frequencies are close to the available observed infrared and Raman frequencies,
giving further support to the present assignments.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Phonon-Polariton Propagation, Guidance, and Control in Bulk and
  Patterned Thin Film Ferroelectric Crystals
Authors: David W. Ward, Eric Statz, Jaime D. Beers, Nikolay Stoyanov, Thomas Feurer, Ryan M. Roth, Richard M. Osgood, Keith A. Nelson
Date: 2004-01-06T16:47:18Z
Abstract:   Using time resolved ultrafast spectroscopy, we have demonstrated that the far
infrared (FIR) excitations in ferroelectric crystals may be modified through an
arsenal of control techniques from the fields of guided waves, geometrical and
Fourier optics, and optical pulse shaping. We show that LiNbO3 and LiTaO3
crystals of 10-250 micron thickness behave as slab waveguides for
phonon-polaritons, which are admixtures of electromagnetic waves and lattice
vibrations, when the polariton wavelength is on the order of or greater than
the crystal thickness. Furthermore, we show that ferroelectric crystals are
amenable to processing by ultrafast laser ablation, allowing for milling of
user-defined patterns designed for guidance and control of phonon-polariton
propagation. We have fabricated several functional structures including THz
rectangular waveguides, resonators, splitters/couplers, interferometers,
focusing reflectors, and diffractive elements. Electric field enhancement has
been obtained with the reflective structures, through spatial shaping, of the
optical excitation beam used for phonon-polariton generation, and through
temporal pulse shaping to permit repetitive excitation of a phonon-polariton
resonant cavity.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The information entropy of quantum mechanical states
Authors: Alexander Stotland, Andrei A. Pomeransky, Eitan Bachmat, Doron Cohen
Date: 2004-01-06T12:38:46Z
Abstract:   It is well known that a Shannon based definition of information entropy leads
in the classical case to the Boltzmann entropy. It is tempting to regard the
Von Neumann entropy as the corresponding quantum mechanical definition. But the
latter is problematic from quantum information point of view. Consequently we
introduce a new definition of entropy that reflects the inherent uncertainty of
quantum mechanical states. We derive for it an explicit expression, and discuss
some of its general properties. We distinguish between the minimum uncertainty
entropy of pure states, and the excess statistical entropy of mixtures.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The Social Architecture of Capitalism
Authors: Ian Wright
Date: 2004-01-06T04:38:23Z
Abstract:   A dynamic model of the social relations between workers and capitalists is
introduced. The model is deduced from the assumption that the law of value is
an organising principle of modern economies. The model self-organises into a
dynamic equilibrium with statistical properties that are in close qualitative
and in many cases quantitative agreement with a broad range of known empirical
distributions of developed capitalism, including the power-law distribution of
firm size, the Laplace distribution of firm and GDP growth, the lognormal
distribution of firm demises, the exponential distribution of the duration of
recessions, the lognormal-Pareto distribution of income, and the gamma-like
distribution of the rate-of-profit of firms. Normally these distributions are
studied in isolation, but this model unifies and connects them within a single
causal framework. In addition, the model generates business cycle phenomena,
including fluctuating wage and profit shares in national income about values
consistent with empirical studies. A testable consequence of the model is a
conjecture that the rate-of-profit distribution is consistent with a
parameter-mix of a ratio of normal variates with means and variances that
depend on a firm size parameter that is distributed according to a power-law.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The Role of Multiferroics in the Negative Index of Refraction
Authors: David W. Ward, Eric Statz, Kevin J. Webb, Keith A. Nelson
Date: 2004-01-06T00:24:14Z
Abstract:   We explore the possibility of realizing intrinsic far infrared negative index
materials (NIM) in multiferroic crystals (crystals simultaneously possessing a
ferroelectric and ferromagnetic phase) possessing electric and magnetic dipole
resonances with nearby resonance frequencies, or overlapping regions of
negative permittivity and permeability. We demonstrate the functionality of
such a material using finite difference time domain simulations. In order to
motivate the connection between multiferroics and negative index materials, we
discuss the negative index of refraction in the polariton picture.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Resonance magneto-resistance in double barrier structure with spin-valve
Authors: N. Ryzhanova, G. Reiss, F. Kanjouri, A. Vedyayev
Date: 2004-01-05T07:10:16Z
Abstract:   The conductance and tunnel magneto-resistance (TMR) of the double barrier
magnetic tunnel junction with spin-valve sandwich (F/P/F) inserted between two
insulating barrier, are theoretically investigated. It is shown, that resonant
tunnelling, due to the quantum well states of the electron confined between two
barriers, sharply depends on the mutual orientation of the magnetizations of
ferromagnetic layers F. The calculated optimistic value of TMR exceeds 2000% .


Category: cond-mat
Title: Excitation of Spin Waves in Superconducting Ferromagnets
Authors: V. Braude, E. B. Sonin
Date: 2003-12-31T14:10:09Z
Abstract:   This Letter presents a theoretical analysis of propagation of spin waves in a
superconducting ferromagnet. The surface impedance was calculated for the case
when the magnetization is normal to the sample surface. We found the
frequencies at which the impedance and the power absorption have singularities
related to the spin wave propagation, and determined the form of these
singularities. With a suitable choice of parameters, there is a frequency
interval in which two propagating spin waves of the same circular polarization
are generated, one of them having a negative group velocity.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Topology, Quasiperiodic functions and the Transport phenomena
Authors: A. Ya. Maltsev, S. P. Novikov
Date: 2003-12-30T19:13:45Z
Abstract:   In this article we give the basic concept of the "Topological Numbers" in
theory of quasiperiodic functions. The main attention is paid to apperance of
such values in transport phenomena including Galvanomagnetic phenomena in
normal metals (Chapter 1) and the modulations of 2D electron gas (Chapter 2).
We give just the main introduction to both of these areas and explain in a
simple way the appearance of the "integral characteristics" in both of these
problems. The paper can not be considered as the detailed survey article in the
area but explains the main basic features of the corresponding phenomena.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Comment on "Dielectric behavior of paraelectric KTaO3, CaTiO3, and
  (Ln_{1/2}Na_{1/2})TiO3 under a dc electric field"
Authors: A. Pashkin, V. Zelezny, M. Savinov, J. Petzelt
Date: 2003-12-30T10:07:15Z
Abstract:   Chen Ang, Bhalla and Cross [Phys. Rev. B 64, 184104 (2001)] have studied the
low-frequency (20 Hz -- 100 kHz) dielectric dispersion of the KTaO3 crystal
under a dc electric field. Performing fits of the electric field dependence
they came to conclusion that an appreciable contribution to the dielectric
permittivity originates from polar clusters. In this Comment we show that the
dielectric permittivity at low frequencies (100 Hz -- 1 MHz) equals to that in
the THz region, close below the polar phonon response. This excludes the
possibility of any appreciable dielectric dispersion due to polar clusters. In
addition, we demonstrate that correct treatment using
Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire theory allows to fit the electric field dependence
of the dielectric constant without assuming any polarization mechanism besides
the polar phonon modes.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Properties of Foreshocks and Aftershocks of the Non-Conservative SOC
  Olami-Feder-Christensen Model: Triggered or Critical Earthquakes?
Authors: A. Helmstetter, S. Hergarten, D. Sornette
Date: 2003-12-30T00:48:59Z
Abstract:   Following Hergarten and Neugebauer [2002] who discovered aftershock and
foreshock sequences in the Olami-Feder-Christensen (OFC) discrete block-spring
earthquake model, we investigate to what degree the simple toppling mechanism
of this model is sufficient to account for the properties of earthquake
clustering in time and space. Our main finding is that synthetic catalogs
generated by the OFC model share practically all properties of real seismicity
at a qualitative level, with however significant quantitative differences. We
find that OFC catalogs can be in large part described by the concept of
triggered seismicity but the properties of foreshocks depend on the mainshock
magnitude, in qualitative agreement with the critical earthquake model and in
disagreement with simple models of triggered seismicity such as the Epidemic
Type Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) model [Ogata, 1988]. Many other features of OFC
catalogs can be reproduced with the ETAS model with a weaker clustering than
real seismicity, i.e. for a very small average number of triggered earthquakes
of first generation per mother-earthquake.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Quasiperiodic localized oscillating solutions in the discrete nonlinear
  Schrödinger equation with alternating on-site potential
Authors: Magnus Johansson, Andrey V. Gorbach
Date: 2003-12-29T18:33:02Z
Abstract:   We present what we believe to be the first known example of an exact
quasiperiodic localized stable solution with spatially symmetric
large-amplitude oscillations in a non-integrable Hamiltonian lattice model. The
model is a one-dimensional discrete nonlinear Schr\"odinger equation with
alternating on-site energies, modelling e.g. an array of optical waveguides
with alternating widths. The solution bifurcates from a stationary discrete gap
soliton, and in a regime of large oscillations its intensity oscillates
periodically between having one peak at the central site, and two symmetric
peaks at the neighboring sites with a dip in the middle. Such solutions, termed
'pulsons', are found to exist in continuous families ranging arbitrarily close
both to the anticontinuous and continuous limits. Furthermore, it is shown that
they may be linearly stable also in a regime of large oscillations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Influence of Co$^{3+}$ spin-state on optical properties of LaCoO$_3$ and
  HoCoO$_3$
Authors: L. V. Nomerovannaya, A. A. Makhnev, S. V. Streltsov, I. A. Nekrasov, M. A. Korotin, S. V. Shiryaev, G. L. Bychkov, S. N. Barilo, V. I. Anisimov
Date: 2003-12-29T13:24:27Z
Abstract:   Optical properties of the isoelectronic compounds LaCoO$_3$ and HoCoO$_3$ has
been experimentally and theoretically investigated. We've measured the real
$\epsilon_1(\omega)$ and imaginary $\epsilon_2(\omega)$ parts of the dielectric
function, reflectance $R(\omega)$ and optical conductivity at room temperature.
The shift of the most pronounced spectral features to the high energy region on
0.3 eV associated with larger distortions due to the smaller rare earth ionic
radii in HoCoO$_3$ in comparison with LaCoO$_3$ was observed. Also there was
found an enhancement of absorption intensity in the range 1.3-2.3 eV in all
kinds of spectra in HoCoO$_3$, which can be attributed basing on the results of
LDA+U calculations to the different spin-states of Co$^{3+}$ ion in these
compounds. The shift of the onset of the absorption from less than 0.1 eV in
LaCoO$_3$ to 0.7 eV in HoCoO$_3$ and an absorption intensity enhancement in a
narrow spectral range 1.2-2.6 eV in HoCoO$_3$ are clearly seen from the
calculated convolution of partial densities of states obtained in the LDA+U
approach. Such changes are assumed to be induced by the different Co$^{3+}$
spin-state in these compounds at room temperature.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Bankruptcy as an exit mechanism for systems with a variable number of
  components
Authors: Corrado Di Guilmi, Edoardo Gaffeo, Mauro Gallegati
Date: 2003-12-29T10:59:54Z
Abstract:   Dynamical systems with components whose sizes evolve according to
multiplicative stochastic rules have been recently combined with entry and exit
processes. We show that the assumptions usually made in modeling exits are at
odds with the available evidence. We discuss a recently proposed macroeconomic
model with random multiplicative shocks and a mechanism for exit based on
bankruptcy, which displays several observed stylized facts for firms' dynamics,
like power law distributions for firms' sizes and Laplace distribution for
firms' growth rates.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Reduction of the Three Dimensional Schrodinger Equation for Multilayered
  Films
Authors: C. Abbott, M. Rasamny, G. W. Fernando
Date: 2003-12-27T23:12:41Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we present a method for reducing the three dimensional
Schrodinger equation to study confined metallic states, such as quantum well
states, in a multilayer film geometry. While discussing some approximations
that are employed when dealing with the three dimensionality of the problem, we
derive a one dimensional equation suitable for studying such states using an
envelope function approach. Some applications to the Cu/Co multilayer system
with regard to spin tunneling/rotations and angle resolved photoemission are
discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Landau-Ginzburg Description of Boundary Critical Phenomena in Two
  Dimensions
Authors: A. Cappelli, G. D'Appollonio, M. Zabzine
Date: 2003-12-27T12:26:47Z
Abstract:   The Virasoro minimal models with boundary are described in the
Landau-Ginzburg theory by introducing a boundary potential, function of the
boundary field value. The ground state field configurations become non-trivial
and are found to obey the soliton equations. The conformal invariant boundary
conditions are characterized by the reparametrization-invariant data of the
boundary potential, that are the number and degeneracies of the stationary
points. The boundary renormalization group flows are obtained by varying the
boundary potential while keeping the bulk critical: they satisfy new selection
rules and correspond to real deformations of the Arnold simple singularities of
A_k type. The description of conformal boundary conditions in terms of boundary
potential and associated ground state solitons is extended to the N=2
supersymmetric case, finding agreement with the analysis of A-type boundaries
by Hori, Iqbal and Vafa.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Non--Ginsburg-Landau Critical Current Behavior in MgCNi3
Authors: D. P. Young, M. Moldovan, P. W. Adams
Date: 2003-12-26T22:25:43Z
Abstract:   We present transport critical current measurements on microfibers consisting
of a 80-nm thick layer of polycrystalline MgCNi3 synthesized directly onto
7-micron diameter carbon fibers. Near the transition temperature, Tc, the
critical current density, Jc, is well described by the power law form
[1-(T/T_c)^2)]^2, with no crossover to the Ginsburg-Landau exponent 1.5. We
extrapolate Jc(0) ~ 4 x 10^7 A/cm^2, which is an order of magnitude greater
than estimates obtained from magnetization measurements of polycrystalline
powders. The field dependence is purely exponential Jc(T,H) = Jc(T) exp(-H/Ho)
over the entire field range of 0 to 9 T. The unconventional scaling behavior of
the critical current appears rooted in an anomalous temperature dependence of
the London penetration depth, suggesting an unusual superconducting ground
state in MgCNi3.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Statistics of Spectra for One-dimensional Quasi-Periodic Systems at the
  Metal-Insulator Transition
Authors: Yoshihiro Takada, Kazusumi Ino, Masanori Yamanaka
Date: 2003-12-26T21:27:14Z
Abstract:   We study spectral statistics of one-dimensional quasi-periodic systems at the
metal-insulator transition. Several types of spectral statistics are observed
at the critical points, lines, and region. On the critical lines, we find the
bandwidth distribution $P_B(w)$ around the origin (in the tail) to have the
form of $P_B(w) \sim w^{\alpha}$ ($P_B(w) \sim e^{-\beta w^{\gamma}}$)
($\alpha, \beta, \gamma > 0 $), while in the critical region $P_B(w) \sim
w^{-\alpha'}$ ($\alpha' > 0$). We also find the level spacing distribution to
follow an inverse power law $P_G(s) \sim s^{- \delta}$ ($\delta > 0$)


Category: cond-mat
Title: 1/N-expansion for the Dicke model and the decoherence program
Authors: Marco Frasca
Date: 2003-12-26T14:44:39Z
Abstract:   An analysis of the Dicke model, N two-level atoms interacting with a single
radiation mode, is done using the Holstein-Primakoff transformation. The main
aim of the paper is to show that, changing the quantization axis with respect
to the common usage, it is possible to prove a general result either for N or
the coupling constant going to infinity for the exact solution of the model.
This completes the analysis, known in the current literature, with respect to
the same model in the limit of N and volume going to infinity, keeping the
density constant. For the latter the proper axis of quantization is given by
the Hamiltonian of the two-level atoms and for the former the proper axis of
quantization is defined by the interaction. The relevance of this result relies
on the observation that a general measurement apparatus acts using
electromagnetic interaction and so, one can states that the thermodynamic limit
is enough to grant the appearance of classical effects. Indeed, recent
experimental results give first evidence that superposition states disappear
interacting with an electromagnetic field having a large number of photons.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Comment on "Metallization of Fluid Nitrogen and the Mott Transition in
  Highly Compressed Low-Z Fluids"
Authors: Marina Bastea
Date: 2003-12-24T22:34:07Z
Abstract:   A comment on ``Metallization of Fluid Nitrogen and the Mott Transition in
Highly Compressed Low-Z Fluids'' by Chau et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 245501
(2003).


Category: cond-mat
Title: The effect of trap anharmonicity on the critical temperature for
  Bose-Einstein condensation
Authors: Augusto Gonzalez
Date: 2003-12-24T19:59:33Z
Abstract:   The anharmonicity of a magnetic atomic trap at long distances from its center
(forty times the radius of the first atomic orbit along the elongated axis,
i.e. hundreds of microns) is shown to increase up to 45 % the temperature for
Bose-Einstein condensation. This effect is perhaps small in the traditional
traps, but should certainly be taken into account in magnetic microtraps, which
characteristic dimensions are of order 1 mm.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Island Nucleation in Silicon on Si(111) Growth under Chemical Vapor
  Deposition
Authors: K. E. Khor, Sankar Das Sarma
Date: 2003-12-23T20:19:30Z
Abstract:   Recent experiments show that the islanding behavior during chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) of Si on Si(111) using disilane (Si${_2}$H${_6}$) is quite
different from that due to molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). While the latter can
be understood using rate equation theories (RET), the islanding exponent
(connecting the power law growth of island density with growth rate) obtained
for the CVD growth is a puzzle, with the CVD exponent being almost twice the
MBE exponent. We carry out (2+1) dimensional kinetic Monte Carlo(MC)
simulations to study this CVD growth. Hydrogen plays a critical role during
growth. Disilane breaks up into hydrides on the Si surface. We use MC
simulations to explore a number of cases involving one or two migrating species
and show that the large islanding exponent is probably due to the presence of
two hydrides, one of which has a much shorter lifetime than the other. We
modify RET taking this possibility into account in order to shed light on the
experimental observation. We calculate the scaling properties of the island
distributions using MC simulations and the modified RET, and conclude that the
large effective CVD exponents arise from the failure of the simple island
number scaling scenario which no longer applies to the two-component situation
prevailing under CVD growth conditions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Collective oscillations of a trapped Fermi gas near a Feshbach resonance
Authors: Sandro Stringari
Date: 2003-12-23T17:26:37Z
Abstract:   The frequencies of the collective oscillations of a harmonically trapped
Fermi gas interacting with large scattering lengths are calculated at zero
temperature using hydrodynamic theory. Different regimes are considered,
including the molecular Bose-Einstein condensate and the unitarity limit for
collisions. We show that the frequency of the radial compressional mode in an
elongated trap exhibits a pronounced non monotonous dependence on the
scattering length, reflecting the role of the interactions in the equation of
state.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Correlation Functions of The Tri-critical 3-states Potts Model
Authors: S. Balaska, K. Demmouche
Date: 2003-12-23T11:07:54Z
Abstract:   We build the Z$_{3}$ invariants fusion rules associated to the
(D$_{4}$,A$_{6}$) conformal algebra. This algebra is known to describe the
tri-critical Potts model. The 4-pt correlation functions of critical fields are
developed in the bootstrap approach, and in the other hand, they are written in
term of integral representation of the conformal blocks. By comparing both the
expressions, one can determine the structure constantes of the operator
algebra.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Order parameters with higher dimensionful composite fields
Authors: Yoshiki Watanabe, Kenji Fukushima, Tetsuo Hatsuda
Date: 2003-12-23T03:48:25Z
Abstract:   We discuss the possibility of the spontaneous symmetry breaking characterized
by order parameters with higher dimensionful composite fields. By analyzing
general Ginzburg-Landau potential for a complex scalar field \phi=\phi_1 + i
\phi_2 with O(2) symmetry, we demonstrate that a phase characterized by <
\phi_1^2 - \phi_2^2 > \neq 0 with < \phi_1 >=< \phi_2 >=0 is realized in a
certain parameter region. To clarify the driving force to favor this phase, we
study the O(2) \phi^6 theory in three dimensions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Two-qubit Quantum Logic Gate in Molecular Magnets
Authors: Jing-Min Hou, Li-Jun Tian, Mo-lin Ge
Date: 2003-12-21T08:41:02Z
Abstract:   We proposed a scheme to realize a controlled-NOT quantum logic gate in a
dimer of exchange coupled single-molecule magnets, $[\textrm{Mn}_4]_2$. We
chosen the ground state and the three low-lying excited states of a dimer in a
finite longitudinal magnetic field as the quantum computing bases and
introduced a pulsed transverse magnetic field with a special frequency. The
pulsed transverse magnetic field induces the transitions between the quantum
computing bases so as to realize a controlled-NOT quantum logic gate. The
transition rates between the quantum computing bases and between the quantum
computing bases and other excited states are evaluated and analyzed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Free Evolution of Superposition States in a Single Cooper Pair Box
Authors: A. Guillaume, J. F. Schneiderman, P. Delsing, H. M. Bozler, P. M. Echternach
Date: 2003-12-19T23:59:19Z
Abstract:   We have fabricated a single Cooper-pair box (SCB) in close proximity to a
single electron transistor (SET) operated in the radio-frequency mode (RF-SET)
with an inductor and capacitor lithographed directly on chip. The RF-SET was
used to measure the charge state of the SCB revealing a 2e periodic charge
quantization. We performed spectroscopy measurements to extract the charging
energy (EC) and the Josephson coupling energy (EJ). Control of the temporal
evolution of the quantum charge state was achieved by applying fast DC pulses
to the SCB gate. The dephasing and relaxation times were extracted from these
measurements


Category: cond-mat
Title: Existence of travelling waves in discrete sine-Gordon rings
Authors: Guy Katriel
Date: 2003-12-19T12:20:28Z
Abstract:   We prove existence results for travelling waves in discrete, damped,
dc-driven sine-Gordon equations with periodic boundary conditions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dephasing in Quantum Dots: Quadratic Coupling to Acoustic Phonons
Authors: E. A. Muljarov, R. Zimmermann
Date: 2003-12-19T12:07:07Z
Abstract:   A microscopic theory of optical transitions in quantum dots with
carrier-phonon interaction is developed. Virtual transitions into higher
confined states with acoustic phonon assistance add a quadratic phonon coupling
to the standard linear one, thus extending the independent Boson model. Summing
infinitely many diagrams in the cumulant, a numerically exact solution for the
interband polarization is found. Its full time dependence and the absorption
lineshape of the quantum dot are calculated. It is the quadratic interaction
which gives rise to a temperature-dependent broadening of the zero-phonon line,
being here calculated for the first time in a consistent scheme.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Correlated Electron Transport
Authors: P. Delaney, J. C. Greer
Date: 2003-12-19T11:56:11Z
Abstract:   Theoretical and experimental values to date for the resistances of single
molecules commonly disagree by orders of magnitude. By reformulating the
transport problem using boundary conditions suitable for correlated
many-electron systems, we approach electron transport across molecules from a
new standpoint. Application of our correlated formalism to benzene-dithiol
gives current-voltage characteristics close to experimental observations. The
method can solve the open system quantum many-body problem accurately, treats
spin exactly and is valid beyond the linear response regime.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Controlled vortex-sound interactions in atomic Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: N. G. Parker, N. P. Proukakis, C. F. Barenghi, C. S. Adams
Date: 2003-12-19T11:04:09Z
Abstract:   The low temperature dynamics of a vortex in a trapped quasi-two-dimensional
Bose-Einstein condensate are studied quantitatively. Precession of an
off-centred vortex in a dimple trap, embedded in a weaker harmonic trap, leads
to the emission of sound in a dipolar radiation pattern. Sound emission and
reabsorption can be controlled by varying the depth of the dimple. In a shallow
dimple, the power emitted is proportional to the vortex acceleration squared
over the precession frequency, whereas for a deep dimple, periodic sound
reabsorption stabilises the vortex against radiation-induced decay.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Rotational dynamics of CO solvated in small He clusters: a quantum Monte
  Carlo study
Authors: Paolo Cazzato, Stefano Paolini, Saverio Moroni, Stefano Baroni
Date: 2003-12-19T08:59:52Z
Abstract:   The rotational dynamics of CO single molecules solvated in small He clusters
(CO@He_N) has been studied using Reptation Quantum Monte Carlo for cluster
sizes up to N=30. Our results are in good agreement with the roto-vibrational
features of the infrared spectrum recently determined for this system, and
provide a deep insight into the relation between the structure of the cluster
and its dynamics. Simulations for large N also provide a prediction of the
effective moment of inertia of CO in the He nano-droplet regime, which has not
been measured so far.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamic Anomalies of Fluids with Isotropic Doubled-Ranged Potential
Authors: Paulo Netz, J. F. Raymundi, Adriana S. Camera, Marcia C. Barbosa
Date: 2003-12-18T19:41:55Z
Abstract:   Using molecular dynamics simulations we investigate the ability of an
analytical three-dimensional double well in reproducing static and dynamic
anomalies found experimentally in liquid water. We find anomalous behavior in
the stable region of the phase diagram if the outer minimum is deeper than the
inner minimum. In the case of a deeper inner minimum, anomalous behavior is
also present but inside the unstable region.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamical suppression of 1/f noise processes in qubit systems
Authors: Lara Faoro, Lorenza Viola
Date: 2003-12-18T17:53:39Z
Abstract:   We investigate the capability of dynamical decoupling techniques to reduce
decoherence from a realistic environment generating 1/f noise. The predominance
of low frequency modes in the noise profile allows for decoherence scenarios
where relatively slow control rates suffice for a drastic improvement. However,
the actual figure of merit is very sensitive to the details of the dynamics,
with decoupling performance which may deteriorate for non-Gaussian noise and/or
high frequency working points. Our results are promising for robust solid-state
qubits and beyond.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Nonlinear Band Gap Transmission in Optical Waveguide Arrays
Authors: Ramaz Khomeriki
Date: 2003-12-18T13:42:44Z
Abstract:   The effect of nonlinear transmission in coupled optical waveguide arrays is
theoretically investigated via numerical simulations on the corresponding model
equations. The realistic experimental setup is suggested injecting the beam in
a single boundary waveguide, linear refractive index of which ($n_0$) is larger
than one ($n$) of other identical waveguides in the array. Particularly, the
effect holds if $\omega(n_0-n)/c>2Q$, where $Q$ is a linear coupling constant
between array waveguides, $\omega$ is a carrier wave frequency and $c$ is a
light velocity. Making numerical experiments in case of discrete nonlinear
Schr\"odinger equation it is shown that the energy transfers from the boundary
waveguide to the waveguide array above certain threshold intensity of the
injected beam. This effect is explained by means of the creation and
propagation of gap solitons in full analogy with the similar phenomenon of
nonlinear supratransmission [F. Geniet, J. Leon, PRL, {\bf 89}, 134102, (2002)]
in case of discrete sine-Gordon lattice.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dispersive charge transport along the surface of an insulating layer
  observed by Electrostatic Force Microscopy
Authors: J. S. Lambert, G. De Loubens, C. Guthmann, M. Saint-Jean, T. Melin
Date: 2003-12-18T12:55:27Z
Abstract:   We report the observation in the direct space of the transport of a few
thousand charges submitted to a tunable electric field along the surface of a
silicon oxide layer. Charges are both deposited and observed using the same
Electrostatic Force Microscope. During the time range accessible to our
measurements (i.e. $t=1\sim1000\un{s}$), the transport of electrons is mediated
by traps in the oxide. We measure the mobility of electrons in the "surface"
states of the silicon oxide layer and show the dispersive nature of their
motion. It is also demonstrated that the saturation of deep oxide traps
strongly enhance the transport of electrons under lateral electric field.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Data-driven derivation of the turbulent energy cascade generator
Authors: J. Cleve, T. Dziekan, J. Schmiegel, O. E. Barndorff-Nielsen, B. R. Pearson, K. R. Sreenivasan, M. Greiner
Date: 2003-12-18T10:32:17Z
Abstract:   Within the framework of random multiplicative energy cascade models of fully
developed turbulence, expressions for two-point correlators and cumulants are
derived, taking into account a proper conversion from an ultrametric to an
Euclidean two-point distance. The comparison with two-point statistics of the
surrogate energy dissipation, extracted from various wind tunnel and
atmospheric boundary layer records, allows an accurate deduction of
multiscaling exponents and cumulants. These exponents serve as the input for
parametric estimates of the probabilistic cascade generator.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Controlling the coexistence of structural phases and the optical
  properties of gallium nanoparticles with optical excitation
Authors: K. F. MacDonald, V. A. Fedotov, S. Pochon, G. Stevens, F. V. Kusmartsev, N. I. Zheludev
Date: 2003-12-18T10:00:02Z
Abstract:   We have observed reversible structural transformations, induced by optical
excitation at 1.55 micrometer, between the beta, gamma and liquid phases of
gallium in self-assembled gallium nanoparticles, with a narrow size
distribution around 50 nm, on the tip of an optical fiber. Only a few tens of
nanowatts of optical excitation per particle are required to control the
transformations, which take the form of a dynamic phase coexistence and are
accompanied by substantial changes in the optical properties of the
nanoparticle film. The time needed to achieve phase equilibrium is in the
microsecond range, and increases critically at the transition temperature.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Space-filling bearings in three dimensions
Authors: R. Mahmoodi Baram, H. J. Herrmann, N. Rivier
Date: 2003-12-18T09:28:13Z
Abstract:   We present the first space-filling bearing in three dimensions. It is shown
that a packing which contains only loops with even number of spheres can be
constructed in a self-similar way and that it can act as a three dimensional
bearing in which spheres can rotate without slip and with negligible torsion
friction.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Stability of strained heteroepitaxial systems in (1+1) dimensions
Authors: P. Thibault, L. J. Lewis
Date: 2003-12-17T20:37:40Z
Abstract:   We present a simple analytical model for the determination of the stable
phases of strained heteroepitaxial systems in (1+1) dimensions. In order for
this model to be consistent with a subsequent dynamic treatment, all
expressions are adjusted to an atomistic Lennard-Jones system. Good agreement
is obtained when the total energy is assumed to consist of two contributions:
the surface energy and the elastic energy. As a result, we determine the stable
phases as a function of the main ``control parameters'' (binding energies,
coverage and lattice mismatch). We find that there exists no set of parameters
leading to an array of islands as a stable configuration. We however show that
a slight modification of the model can lead to the formation of stable arrays
of islands.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Gap and out-gap breathers in a binary modulated discrete nonlinear
  Schrödinger model
Authors: Andrey V. Gorbach, Magnus Johansson
Date: 2003-12-17T18:00:09Z
Abstract:   We consider a modulated discrete nonlinear Schr\"odinger (DNLS) model with
alternating on-site potential, having a linear spectrum with two branches
separated by a 'forbidden' gap. Nonlinear localized time-periodic solutions
with frequencies in the gap and near the gap -- discrete gap and out-gap
breathers (DGBs and DOGBs) -- are investigated. Their linear stability is
studied varying the system parameters from the continuous to the
anti-continuous limit, and different types of oscillatory and real
instabilities are revealed. It is shown, that generally DGBs in infinite
modulated DNLS chains with hard (soft) nonlinearity do not possess any
oscillatory instabilities for breather frequencies in the lower (upper) half of
the gap. Regimes of 'exchange of stability' between symmetric and antisymmetric
DGBs are observed, where an increased breather mobility is expected. The
transformation from DGBs to DOGBs when the breather frequency enters the linear
spectrum is studied, and the general bifurcation picture for DOGBs with tails
of different wave numbers is described. Close to the anti-continuous limit, the
localized linear eigenmodes and their corresponding eigenfrequencies are
calculated analytically for several gap/out-gap breather configurations,
yielding explicit proof of their linear stability or instability close to this
limit.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Phase coexistence in Gallium nanoparticles controlled by electron
  excitation
Authors: S. Pochon, K. F. MacDonald, R. J. Knize, N. I. Zheludev
Date: 2003-12-17T17:02:59Z
Abstract:   In Gallium nanoparticles of 100 nm in diameter grown on the tip of an optical
fiber from an atomic beam we observed equilibrium coexistence of gamma, beta
and liquid structural phases that can be controlled by e-beam excitation in a
highly reversible and reproducible fashion. With 2 keV electrons only 1 pJ of
excitation energy per nanoparticle is needed to exercise control, with the
equilibrium phase achieved in less than a few tenths of a microsecond. The
transformations between coexisting phases are accompanied by a continuous
change in the nanoparticle film's reflectivity.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Kondo Effect and Surface-State Electrons
Authors: L. Limot, R. Berndt
Date: 2003-12-17T13:08:33Z
Abstract:   We have used low temperature scanning tunneling spectroscopy and atomic
manipulation to study the role of surface-state electrons in the Kondo effect
of an isolated cobalt atom adsorbed on Ag(111). We show that the observed Kondo
signature remains unchanged in close proximity of a monoatomic step, where the
local density of states of the surface-state electrons is strongly perturbed.
This result indicates a minor role for surface-state electrons in the Kondo
effect of cobalt, compared to bulk electrons. A possible explanation for our
findings is presented.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Nonextensive scalar field theories and dark energy models
Authors: Christian Beck
Date: 2003-12-17T12:55:37Z
Abstract:   Current astronomical measurements indicate that approximately 73% of the
universe is made up of dark energy. Stochastically quantized self-interacting
scalar fields can serve as suitable models to generate dark energy. We study a
particular model where the scalar field theory underlying dark energy exhibits
strongest possible chaotic behaviour. It is shown that the fluctuating chaotic
field momenta obey a generalized (nonextensive) statistical mechanics, with an
entropic index q given by q=3, respectively q=-1 if the escort formalism is
used.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Propagating phase boundaries as sonic horizons
Authors: Tanmay Vachaspati
Date: 2003-12-15T22:30:31Z
Abstract:   If certain conditions are met, a propagating phase boundary can be a sonic
horizon. Sonic Hawking radiation from such a phase boundary is expected in the
quantum theory. The Hawking temperature for typical values of system parameters
can be as large as $\sim 0.04$ K. Since the setup does not require the physical
transport of material, it evades the seemingly insurmountable difficulties of
the usual proposals to create a sonic horizon in which fluid is required to
flow at supersonic speeds. Issues that are likely to present difficulties that
are particular to this setup are discussed. Hawking evaporation of the sonic
horizon is also expected and is predicted to lead to a deceleration of the
phase boundary.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Notes on RVB-Vanilla by Anderson et al
Authors: C. M. Varma
Date: 2003-12-15T22:07:16Z
Abstract:   The claims made for the Resonating Valence Bond ideas for the cuprates in a
recent paper by Anderson et al. on the basis of a variational calculation are
discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Statics and Dynamics of Quantum XY and Heisenberg Systems on Graphs
Authors: Tobias J. Osborne
Date: 2003-12-15T10:46:28Z
Abstract:   We consider the statics and dynamics of distinguishable spin-1/2 systems on
an arbitrary graph G with N vertices. In particular, we consider systems of
quantum spins evolving according to one of two hamiltonians: (i) the XY
hamiltonian H_XY, which contains an XY interaction for every pair of spins
connected by an edge in G; and (ii) the Heisenberg hamiltonian H_Heis, which
contains a Heisenberg interaction term for every pair of spins connected by an
edge in G. We find that the action of the XY (respectively, Heisenberg)
hamiltonian on state space is equivalent to the action of the adjacency matrix
(respectively, combinatorial laplacian) of a sequence G_k, k=0,..., N of graphs
derived from G (with G_1=G). This equivalence of actions demonstrates that the
dynamics of these two models is the same as the evolution of a free particle
hopping on the graphs G_k. Thus we show how to replace the complicated dynamics
of the original spin model with simpler dynamics on a more complicated
geometry. A simple corollary of our approach allows us to write an explicit
spectral decomposition of the XY model in a magnetic field on the path
consisting of N vertices. We also use our approach to utilise results from
spectral graph theory to solve new spin models: the XY model and heisenberg
model in a magnetic field on the complete graph.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Self-similar space-filling packings in three dimensions
Authors: Reza Mahmoodi Baram, Hans J. Herrmann
Date: 2003-12-14T13:13:35Z
Abstract:   We develop an algorithm to construct new self-similar space-filling packings
of spheres. Each topologically different configuration is characterized by its
own fractal dimension. We also find the first bi-cromatic packing known up to
now.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Nanoscale Quantum Solvation of para-H$_2$ around the Linear OCS Molecule
  inside $^4$He Droplets
Authors: Yongkyung Kwon, K. Birgitta Whaley
Date: 2003-12-13T00:27:25Z
Abstract:   We present a microscopic analysis of the quantum solvation structures of
para-H$_2$ around the OCS molecule when embedded in low temperature $^4$He
droplets. The structures of clusters containing M=5 and 6 para-H$_2$ molecules
are compared with corresponding structures for M=1 (OCS-H$_2$ complex) and M=17
(a full solvation shell), as well as with the clusters in the absence of
helium. We find that the helium has negligible effect on the structures for the
small and large OCS(H$_2$)$_M$ clusters, but that it modifies the cluster
structure for M=6. We discuss implications of these results for the onset of
superfluidity in the solvating hydrogen shell and for spectroscopic
measurements.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Functional bosonization with time dependent perturbations
Authors: Carlos M. Naón, Mariano J. Salvay, Marta L. Trobo
Date: 2003-12-12T20:56:50Z
Abstract:   We extend a path-integral approach to bosonization previously developed in
the framework of equilibrium Quantum Field Theories, to the case in which
time-dependent interactions are taken into account. In particular we consider a
non covariant version of the Thirring model in the presence of a dynamic
barrier at zero temperature. By using the Closed Time Path (Schwinger-Keldysh)
formalism, we compute the Green's function and the Total Energy Density of the
system. Since our model contains the Tomonaga Luttinger model as a particular
case, we make contact with recent results on non-equilibrium electronic
systems.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Growth of GaMnAs under near-stoichiometric conditions
Authors: V. Avrutin, D. Humienik, S. Frank, A. Koeder, W. Schoch, W. Limmer, R. Sauer, A. Waag
Date: 2003-12-12T15:28:31Z
Abstract:   We studied the effect of the V/III flux ratio and substrate temperature on
magnetotransport properties and lattice parameters of Ga0.96Mn0.04As grown by
molecular beam epitaxy. For all the substrate temperatures, the conductivities
and Curie temperatures of the layers were found to increase as the V/III flux
ratio approaches 1. The Curie temperature as high as 95 K was achieved for the
Ga0.96Mn0.04As samples grown at 240C and a V/III ratio of about 1.5. The
lattice parameter of Ga0.96Mn0.04As increased with decreasing V/III ratio
and/or increasing growth temperature. Possible reasons for the effect of V/III
ratio on the magnetotransport properties and lattice parameter of GaMnAs are
discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Transverse Patterns in Nonlinear Optical Resonators
Authors: Kestutis Staliunas, Victor J. Sanchez-Morcillo
Date: 2003-12-12T12:23:03Z
Abstract:   The book is devoted to the formation and dynamics of localized structures
(vortices, solitons) and extended patterns (stripes, hexagons, tilted waves) in
nonlinear optical resonators such as lasers, optical parametric oscillators,
and photorefractive oscillators. The theoretical analysis is performed by
deriving order parameter equations, and also through numerical integration of
microscopic models of the systems under investigation. Experimental
observations, and possible technological implementations of transverse optical
patterns are also discussed. A comparison with patterns found in other
nonlinear systems, i.e. chemical, biological, and hydrodynamical systems, is
given. This article contains the table of contents and the introductory chapter
of the book.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Analytical Bounce Solution in a Dissipative Quantum Tunneling
Authors: D. K. Park
Date: 2003-12-12T11:52:38Z
Abstract:   The analytical bounce solution is derived in terms of the polygamma function
in the Caldeira-Leggett's dissipative quantum tunneling model. The classical
action for the bounce solution lies between the upper and lower bounds in the
full range of $\alpha$, where $\alpha$ is a dissipation coefficient. The bounce
peak point increases from 1 to 4/3 with increase of $\alpha$. In spite of
various nice features we have shown that the solution we have derived is not
exact one by making use of the zero mode argument in the linearized fluctuation
equation. However, our solution can be a starting point for approximate
computation of the prefactor in this model.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Ultrametricity in Fund of Funds Diversification
Authors: Gabriele Susinno, Maria Augusta Miceli
Date: 2003-12-12T11:11:28Z
Abstract:   Minimum market transparency requirements impose Hedge Fund (HF) managers to
use the statement declared strategy in practice. However each declared strategy
may actually origin a multiplicity of implemented management decisions. Is then
the "actual "strategy the same as the "announced" strategy? Can the actual
strategy be monitored or compared to the actual strategy of HF belonging to the
same "announced" class? Can the announced or actual strategy be used as a
quantitative argument in the fund of funds policy? With the appropriate metric,
it is possible to draw a minimum spanning tree (MST) to emphasize the
similarity structure that could be hidden in raw correlation matrix of HF
returns.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Radiative corrections to the excitonic molecule state in GaAs
  microcavities
Authors: A. L. Ivanov, P. Borri, W. Langbein, U. Woggon
Date: 2003-12-11T11:50:22Z
Abstract:   The optical properties of excitonic molecules (XXs) in GaAs-based quantum
well microcavities (MCs) are studied, both theoretically and experimentally. We
show that the radiative corrections to the XX state, the Lamb shift
$\Delta^{\rm MC}_{\rm XX}$ and radiative width $\Gamma^{\rm MC}_{\rm XX}$, are
large, about $10-30 %$ of the molecule binding energy $\epsilon_{\rm XX}$, and
definitely cannot be neglected. The optics of excitonic molecules is dominated
by the in-plane resonant dissociation of the molecules into outgoing
1$\lambda$-mode and 0$\lambda$-mode cavity polaritons. The later decay channel,
``excitonic molecule $\to$ 0$\lambda$-mode polariton + 0$\lambda$-mode
polariton'', deals with the short-wavelength MC polaritons invisible in
standard optical experiments, i.e., refers to ``hidden'' optics of
microcavities. By using transient four-wave mixing and pump-probe
spectroscopies, we infer that the radiative width, associated with excitonic
molecules of the binding energy $\epsilon_{\rm XX} \simeq 0.9-1.1$ meV, is
$\Gamma^{\rm MC}_{\rm XX} \simeq 0.2-0.3$ meV in the microcavities and
$\Gamma^{\rm QW}_{\rm XX} \simeq 0.1$ meV in a reference GaAs single quantum
well (QW). We show that for our high-quality quasi-two-dimensional
nanostructures the $T_2 = 2 T_1$ limit, relevant to the XX states, holds at
temperatures below 10 K, and that the bipolariton model of excitonic molecules
explains quantitatively and self-consistently the measured XX radiative widths.
We also find and characterize two critical points in the dependence of the
radiative corrections against the microcavity detuning, and propose to use the
critical points for high-precision measurements of the molecule bindingenergy
and microcavity Rabi splitting.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Surface location of sodium atoms attached to He-3 nanodroplets
Authors: F. Stienkemeier, O. Bunermann, R. Mayol, F. Ancilotto, M. Barranco, M. Pi
Date: 2003-12-11T09:50:24Z
Abstract:   We have experimentally studied the electronic $3p\leftarrow 3s$ excitation of
Na atoms attached to $^3$He droplets by means of laser-induced fluorescence as
well as beam depletion spectroscopy. From the similarities of the spectra
(width/shift of absorption lines) with these of Na on $^4$He droplets, we
conclude that sodium atoms reside in a ``dimple'' on the droplet surface. The
experimental results are supported by Density Functional calculations at zero
temperature, which confirm the surface location of sodium on $^3$He droplets,
and provide a microscopic description of the ``dimple'' structure.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Convergence of spectra of graph-like thin manifolds
Authors: Pavel Exner, Olaf Post
Date: 2003-12-10T15:52:30Z
Abstract:   We consider a family of compact manifolds which shrinks with respect to an
appropriate parameter to a graph. The main result is that the spectrum of the
Laplace-Beltrami operator converges to the spectrum of the (differential)
Laplacian on the graph with Kirchhoff boundary conditions at the vertices. On
the other hand, if the the shrinking at the vertex parts of the manifold is
sufficiently slower comparing to that of the edge parts, the limiting spectrum
corresponds to decoupled edges with Dirichlet boundary conditions at the
endpoints. At the borderline between the two regimes we have a third
possibility when the limiting spectrum can be described by a nontrivial
coupling at the vertices.


Category: cond-mat
Title: On the economy of web links: Simulating the exchange process
Authors: Boris Galitsky, Mark Levene
Date: 2003-12-09T21:19:40Z
Abstract:   In the modern web economy hyperlinks have already attained monetary value as
incoming links to a web site can increase its visibility on major search
engines. Thus links can be viewed as investment instruments that can be the
subject of an exchange process. In this study we build a simple model performed
by rational agents, whereby links can be bought and sold. Through simulation we
achieve consistent economic behaviour of the artificial web community and
provide analysis of its micro- and macro-level parameters. In our simulations
we take the link economy to its extreme, where a significant number of links
are exchanged, concluding that it will lead to a winner take all situation.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Comment on "Observation of Bose-Einstein Condensation of Molecules",
  cond-mat/0311617
Authors: M. Wouters, J. Tempere, J. T. Devreese
Date: 2003-12-09T16:50:28Z
Abstract:   In this comment, we argue that the recent experiment of Ketterle and
co-workers does not necessarily need to be interpreted as indicating that the
true scattering amplitude between two molecules becomes small (8 nm measured
vs. 120 nm predicted). Rather it can be interpreted as indicating that the
energy of the achieved state is much lower than both the (variational) energy
for a BCS state and the energy of a molecular condensate. In this sense, we
suggest that the experiment may point to a novel many-body state, that is
neither the BCS nor the molecular BEC state, and that still has to be
identified.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Spread of decisions in the corporate board network
Authors: Stefano Battiston, Gerard Weisbuch, Eric Bonabeau
Date: 2003-12-09T16:39:16Z
Abstract:   Boards of large corporations sharing some of their directors are connected in
complex networks. Boards are responsible for corporations' long-term strategy
and are often involved in decisions about a common topic related to the belief
in economical growth or recession.
  We are interested in understanding under which conditions a large majority of
boards making a same decision can emerge in the network. We present a model
where board directors are engaged in a decision making dynamics based on "herd
behavior". Boards influence each other through shared directors.
  We find that imitation of colleagues and opinion bias due to the interlock do
not trigger an avalanche of identical decisions over the board network, whereas
the information about interlocked boards' decisions does. There is no need to
invoke global public information, nor external driving forces.
  This model provides a simple endogenous mechanism to explain the fact that
boards of the largest corporations of a country can, in the span of a few
months, take the same decisions about general topics.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Surface effects on nanowire transport: numerical investigation using the
  Boltzmann equation
Authors: Venkat S. Sundaram, Ari Mizel
Date: 2003-12-09T16:20:06Z
Abstract:   A direct numerical solution of the steady-state Boltzmann equation in a
cylindrical geometry is reported. Finite-size effects are investigated in large
semiconducting nanowires using the relaxation-time approximation. A nanowire is
modelled as a combination of an interior with local transport parameters
identical to those in the bulk, and a finite surface region across whose width
the carrier density decays radially to zero. The roughness of the surface is
incorporated by using lower relaxation-times there than in the interior.
  An argument supported by our numerical results challenges a commonly used
zero-width parametrization of the surface layer. In the non-degenerate limit,
appropriate for moderately doped semiconductors, a finite surface width model
does produce a positive longitudinal magneto-conductance, in agreement with
existing theory. However, the effect is seen to be quite small (a few per cent)
for realistic values of the wire parameters even at the highest practical
magnetic fields. Physical insights emerging from the results are discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Simulation of the physical properties of the chalcogenide glass
  As$_2$S$_3$ using a density-functional-based tight-binding method
Authors: S. I. Simdyankin, S. R. Elliott, Z. Hajnal, T. A. Niehaus, Th. Frauenheim
Date: 2003-12-09T15:46:01Z
Abstract:   We have used a density-functional-based tight-binding method in order to
create structural models of the canonical chalcogenide glass, amorphous
(a-)As$_2$S$_3$. The models range from one containing defects that are both
chemical (homopolar bonds) and topological (valence-alternation pairs) in
nature to one that is defect-free (stoichiometric). The structural, vibrational
and electronic properties of the simulated models are in good agreement with
experimental data where available. The electronic densities of states obtained
for all models show clean optical band gaps. A certain degree of electron-state
localization at the band edges is observed for all models, which suggests that
photoinduced phenomena in chalcogenide glasses may not necessarily be
attributed to the excitation of defects of only one particular kind.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Scalable register initialization for quantum computing in an optical
  lattice
Authors: Gavin K. Brennen, Guido Pupillo, Ana Maria Rey, Charles W. Clark, Carl J. Williams
Date: 2003-12-08T19:59:05Z
Abstract:   The Mott insulator state created by loading an atomic Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC) into an optical lattice may be used as a means to prepare a
register of atomic qubits in a quantum computer. Such architecture requires a
lattice commensurately filled with atoms, which corresponds to the insulator
state only in the limit of zero inter-well tunneling. We show that a lattice
with spatial inhomogeneity created by a quadratic magnetic trapping potential
can be used to isolate a subspace in the center which is impervious to
hole-hoping. Components of the wavefunction with more than one atom in any well
can be projected out by selective measurement on a molecular photo-associative
transition. Maintaining the molecular coupling induces a quantum Zeno effect
that can sustain a commensurately filled register for the duration of a quantum
computation.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Evidence for parametric memory and correlation in semiconductor
  microcavities
Authors: S. Kundermann, M. Saba, C. Ciuti, T. Guillet, JL. Staehli, B. Deveaud
Date: 2003-12-08T18:58:32Z
Abstract:   We measured the dynamics of polariton parametric stimulated scattering in
semiconductor microcavities, by time-resolving the amplified signal with 250 fs
resolution. Our experiments demonstrate that the stimulation process is
considerably delayed with respect to the arrival time of both probe and pump
pulses. This effect is clearly observable in our high quality sample due to the
long lifetime of the microcavity polaritons (about 10 ps), and it is in
excellent agreement with the model describing the coherent conversion of two
pump polaritons into a signal-idler pair. We demonstrate that the
non-instantaneous character of the polariton stimulation occurs because the
polariton-wave amplification requires the build up of correlated signal-idler
polariton fields.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Evolution of the Protein Interaction Network of Budding Yeast: Role of
  the Protein Family Compatibility Constraint
Authors: K. -I. Goh, B. Kahng, D. Kim
Date: 2003-12-08T15:15:42Z
Abstract:   Understanding of how protein interaction networks (PIN) of living organisms
have evolved or are organized can be the first stepping stone in unveiling how
life works on a fundamental ground. Here we introduce a hybrid network model
composed of the yeast PIN and the protein family interaction network. The
essential ingredient of the model includes the protein family identity and its
robustness under evolution, as well as the three previously proposed ones: gene
duplication, divergence, and mutation. We investigate diverse structural
properties of our model with parameter values relevant to yeast, finding that
the model successfully reproduces the empirical data.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Adiabatic association of ultracold molecules via magnetic field tunable
  interactions
Authors: Krzysztof Goral, Thorsten Koehler, Simon A. Gardiner, Eite Tiesinga, Paul S. Julienne
Date: 2003-12-06T20:22:03Z
Abstract:   We consider in detail the situation of applying a time dependent external
magnetic field to a 87Rb atomic Bose-Einstein condensate held in a harmonic
trap, in order to adiabatically sweep the interatomic interactions across a
Feshbach resonance to produce diatomic molecules. To this end, we introduce a
minimal two-body Hamiltonian depending on just five measurable parameters of a
Feshbach resonance, which accurately determines all low energy binary
scattering observables, in particular, the molecular conversion efficiency of
just two atoms. Based on this description of the microscopic collision
phenomena, we use the many-body theory of T. Koehler and K. Burnett [Phys. Rev.
A 65, 033601 (2002)] to study the efficiency of the association of molecules in
a 87Rb Bose-Einstein condensate during a linear passage of the magnetic field
strength across the 100 mT Feshbach resonance. We explore different,
experimentally accessible, parameter regimes, and compare the predictions of
Landau-Zener, configuration interaction, and two level mean field calculations
with those of the microscopic many-body approach. Our comparative studies
reveal a remarkable insensitivity of the molecular conversion efficiency with
respect to both the details of the microscopic binary collision physics and the
coherent nature of the Bose-Einstein condensed gas, provided that the magnetic
field strength is varied linearly. We provide the reasons for this universality
of the molecular production achieved by linear ramps of the magnetic field
strength, and identify the Landau-Zener coefficient determined by F.H. Mies et
al. [Phys. Rev. A 61, 022721 (2000)] as the main parameter that controls the
efficiency.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Families of Matter-Waves for Two-Component Bose-Einstein Condensates
Authors: P. G. Kevrekidis, H. Nistazakis, D. J. Frantzeskakis, Boris A. Malomed, R. Carretero-González
Date: 2003-12-06T13:29:28Z
Abstract:   We produce several families of solutions for two-component nonlinear
Schr\"{o}dinger/Gross-Pitaevskii equations. These include domain walls and the
first example of an antidark or gray soliton in the one component, bound to a
bright or dark soliton in the other. Most of these solutions are linearly
stable in their entire domain of existence. Some of them are relevant to
nonlinear optics, and all to Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs). In the latter
context, we demonstrate robustness of the structures in the presence of
parabolic and periodic potentials (corresponding, respectively, to the magnetic
trap and optical lattices in BECs).


Category: cond-mat
Title: Decoherence of number states in phase-sensitive reservoirs
Authors: A. Serafini, S. De Siena, F. Illuminati
Date: 2003-12-05T19:02:08Z
Abstract:   The non-unitary evolution of initial number states in general Gaussian
environments is solved analytically. Decoherence in the channels is quantified
by determining explicitly the purity of the state at any time. The influence of
the squeezing of the bath on decoherence is discussed. The behavior of coherent
superpositions of number states is addressed as well.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Transition radiation by matter-wave solitons in optical lattices
Authors: A. V. Yulin, D. V. Skryabin, P. St. J. Russell
Date: 2003-12-05T16:44:57Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate that matter-wave solitary pulses formed from Bose condensed
atoms moving inside optical lattices continuously radiate dispersive matter
waves with prescribed momentum. Our analytical results for the radiation
parameters and the soliton decay rate are found to be in excellent agreement
with numerical modelling performed for experimentally relevant parameters.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Path integral formulation of the tunneling dynamics of a superfluid
  Fermi gas in an optical potential
Authors: M. Wouters, J. Tempere, J. T. Devreese
Date: 2003-12-05T11:11:25Z
Abstract:   To describe the tunneling dynamics of a stack of two-dimensional fermionic
superfluids in an optical potential, we derive an effective action functional
from a path integral treatment. This effective action leads, in the saddle
point approximation, to equations of motion for the density and the phase of
the superfluid Fermi gas in each layer. In the strong coupling limit (where
bosonic molecules are formed) these equations reduce to a discrete nonlinear
Schrodinger equation, where the molecular tunneling amplitude is reduced for
large binding energies. In the weak coupling (BCS) regime, we study the
evolution of the stacked superfluids and derive an approximate analytical
expression for the Josephson oscillation frequency in an external harmonic
potential. Both in the weak and intermediate coupling regimes the detection of
the Josephson oscillations described by our path integral treatment constitutes
experimental evidence for the fermionic superfluid regime.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamics of entanglement in two coupled qubits
Authors: Vivek M. Aji, Joel E. Moore
Date: 2003-12-04T22:36:36Z
Abstract:   Considerable progress has been made in understanding how dissipation drives
the state of a single qubit from a quantum-mechanical superposition to a
classical mixed state. This paper uses a Bloch-Redfield approach to study how,
in a system of two qubits, dissipation drives the bipartite state of the two
qubits from an entangled state to a product state. The measure used for
mixed-state entanglement is Wootters's formula for the entanglement of
formation. For qubits that start in an entangled state and are then decoupled,
entanglement is found to decay faster in general than the decoherence of single
qubit states by a factor $2/\log 2$ that can be obtained analytically in a
limiting case. We show that the dynamics of entanglement for realistic
parameters is different from that of fidelity: for some experimental parameters
a bipartite state loses fidelity much more rapidly than it loses entanglement.
These results are of some practical interest since entanglement is thought to
be the essential ``fuel'' for fast quantum algorithms.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Lattice-gas modeling of CO adlayers on Pd(100)
Authors: Da-Jiang Liu
Date: 2003-12-04T20:44:45Z
Abstract:   Using a lattice-gas model with pairwise interactions, we study the ordered
structures, coverage dependence of the heat of adsorption, and other
experimentally observable behavior of adsorbed CO overlayers on Pd(100) single
crystal surfaces. Transfer matrix and Monte Carlo methods give accurate
information regarding the lattice-gas model that often contradicts simple
mean-field-like analysis. We demonstrate the usefulness of the model by
reproducing experimental results over a large range of pressures and
temperatures.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Quasi-classical Approach to Bose Condensation in a Finite Potential Well
Authors: L. Banyai, A. M. Bundaru, H. Haug
Date: 2003-12-04T13:21:13Z
Abstract:   We treat the problem of self-consistently interacting bosons in the presence
of a finite (but macroscopic) potential well within a quasi-classical
approximation for the normal component and the order parameter. We solve the
equilibrium problem and show, that actually condensation occurs in two steps.
One already at low densities with Bose condensation only in the well and
another one corresponding to the usual condensation in bulk. The peak and width
of the distribution of trapped particles in the well display a distinct
signature of the local condensation. A possible connection to recent
experiments with excitons is discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Exponential splitting of bound states in a waveguide with a pair of
  distant windows
Authors: D. Borisov, P. Exner
Date: 2003-12-04T12:59:54Z
Abstract:   We consider Laplacian in a straight planar strip with Dirichlet boundary
which has two Neumann ``windows'' of the same length the centers of which are
$2l$ apart, and study the asymptotic behaviour of the discrete spectrum as
$l\to\infty$. It is shown that there are pairs of eigenvalues around each
isolated eigenvalue of a single-window strip and their distances vanish
exponentially in the limit $l\to\infty$. We derive an asymptotic expansion also
in the case where a single window gives rise to a threshold resonance which the
presence of the other window turns into a single isolated eigenvalue.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Comment on "Total Negative Refraction in Real Crystals for Ballistic
  Electrons and Light" (Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 157404 (2003))
Authors: H. -F. Yau, J. -P. Liu, B. Ke, C. -H. Kuo, Z. Ye
Date: 2003-12-04T12:42:09Z
Abstract:   Recently, Zhang et al. (Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 157404 (2003)) have demonstrated
that an amphoteric refraction, i. e. both positive and negative refraction, may
prevail at the interface of two uniaxial anisotropic crystals when their
optical axes are in different directions. The authors subsequently made a
correspondence between such a refraction with the negative refraction expected
for Left Handed Materials (LHMs). Here we comment that the amphoteric
refraction can be observed even with one uniaxial crystal, and the refraction
is not related to the negative refraction expected for the much debated LHM.
Rather, the phenomenon is a natural result of anisotropic media.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Entanglement and Quantum Phases in the Anisotropic Ferromagnetic
  Heisenberg Chain in the Presence of Domain Walls
Authors: F. C. Alcaraz, A. Saguia, M. S. Sarandy
Date: 2003-12-03T20:50:36Z
Abstract:   We discuss entanglement in the spin-1/2 anisotropic ferromagnetic Heisenberg
chain in the presence of a boundary magnetic field generating domain walls. By
increasing the magnetic field, the model undergoes a first-order quantum phase
transition from a ferromagnetic to a kink-type phase, which is associated to a
jump in the content of entanglement available in the system. Above the critical
point, pairwise entanglement is shown to be non-vanishing and independent of
the boundary magnetic field for large chains. Based on this result, we provide
an analytical expression for the entanglement between arbitrary spins. Moreover
the effects of the quantum domains on the gapless region and for
antiferromagnetic anisotropy are numerically analysed. Finally multiparticle
entanglement properties are considered, from which we establish a
characterization of the critical anisotropy separating the gapless regime from
the kink-type phase.


Category: cond-mat
Title: A new approach to business fluctuations: heterogeneous interacting
  agents, scaling laws and financial fragility
Authors: Domenico Delli Gatti, Corrado Di Guilmi, Edoardo Gaffeo, Gianfranco Giulioni, Mauro Gallegati, Antonio Palestrini
Date: 2003-12-03T14:13:18Z
Abstract:   In this paper we discuss a scaling approach to business fluctuations. Our
starting point consists in recognizing that concepts and methods derived from
physics have allowed economists to (re)discover a set of stylized facts which
have to be satisfactorily accounted for in their models. Standard
macroeconomics, based on a reductionist approach centered on the representative
agent, is definitely badly equipped for this task. On the contrary, we show
that a simple financial fragility agent-based model, based on complex
interactions of heterogeneous agents, is able to replicate a large number of
scaling type stylized facts with a remarkable high degree of statistical
precision.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Role of the superexchange interaction in magnetic transition and polaron
  crossover
Authors: Jayita Chatterjee, A. N. Das
Date: 2003-12-03T05:48:28Z
Abstract:   The Hubbard-Holstein model is studied including double-exchange interaction
and superexchange interaction using a variational phonon basis obtained through
the modified Lang-Firsov (MLF) transformation followed by the squeezing
transformation. The kinetic energy, polaron crossover and magnetic transition
are investigated as a function of electron-phonon ($e$-ph) coupling and
electron concentration for different values of antiferromagnetic superexchange
interaction ($J$) between the core spins. The polaron crossover, magnetic
transition and the suppression of ferromagnetic transition with $J $ are
discussed for the model.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Effective collective barrier for magnetic relaxation in frozen
  ferrofluids
Authors: Ruslan Prozorov, Tanya Prozorov, Alexey Snezhko
Date: 2003-12-03T04:12:13Z
Abstract:   Magnetic relaxation and frequency response were measured in frozen
ferrimagnetic colloids of different concentrations. A crossover from reversible
to irreversible behavior is observed for concentrated colloids. In irreversible
state, magnetic relaxation is time-logarithmic over seven orders of magnitude
of experimental time windows. A master curve construction within mean field
phenomenological model is applied to extract effective collective barrier as a
function of the irreversible magnetization. The barrier logarithmically
diverges, providing evidence for self-organized critical behavior during
magnetic relaxation in frozen ferrofluids.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The Efficiency of Defect Production in Planar Superconductors and Liquid
  Crystals
Authors: R. J. Rivers, A. Swarup
Date: 2003-12-02T23:15:34Z
Abstract:   A recent experiment that sees the spontaneous creation of magnetic flux on
quenching high-$T_c$ films has shown that earlier null results were a
consequence of the lack of saturation of the Zurek-Kibble causal bounds against
which flux density was measured. In this letter we estimate how efficient the
production of topological charge is in planar systems, both for the
aforementioned experiment (when flux measures topological charge) and for an
earlier experiment on planar liquid crystals. Agreement is good.


Category: cond-mat
Title: On the derivation of amplitude equations for nonlinear oscillators
  subject to arbitrary forcing
Authors: R. Toral, C. Mayol, C. Mirasso
Date: 2003-12-02T16:21:35Z
Abstract:   By using a generalization of the multiple scales technique we develop a
method to derive amplitude equations for zero--dimensional forced systems. The
method allows to consider either additive or multiplicative forcing terms and
can be straightforwardly applied to the case that the forcing is white noise.
We give examples of the use of this method to the case of the van der
Pol--Duffing oscillator. The writing of the amplitude equations in terms of a
Lyapunov potential allow us to obtain an analytical expression for the
probability distribution function which reproduces reasonably well the
numerical simulation results.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The Boson peak and the phonons in glasses
Authors: S. Ciliberti, T. S. Grigera, V. Martin-Mayor, G. Parisi, P. Verrocchio
Date: 2003-12-02T15:13:53Z
Abstract:   Despite the presence of topological disorder, phonons seem to exist also in
glasses at very high frequencies (THz) and they remarkably persist into the
supercooled liquid. A universal feature of such a systems is the Boson peak, an
excess of states over the standard Debye contribution at the vibrational
density of states. Exploiting the euclidean random matrix theory of vibrations
in amorphous systems we show that this peak is the signature of a phase
transition in the space of the stationary points of the energy, from a
minima-dominated phase (with phonons) at low energy to a saddle-point dominated
phase (without phonons). The theoretical predictions are checked by means of
numeric simulations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Averaging For Solitons With Nonlinearity Management
Authors: D. E. Pelinovsky, P. G. Kevrekidis, D. J. Frantzeskakis
Date: 2003-12-02T00:35:30Z
Abstract:   We develop an averaging method for solitons of the nonlinear Schr{\"o}dinger
equation with periodically varying nonlinearity coefficient. This method is
used to effectively describe solitons in Bose-Einstein condensates, in the
context of the recently proposed and experimentally realizable technique of
Feshbach resonance management. Using the derived local averaged equation, we
study matter-wave bright and dark solitons and demonstrate a very good
agreement between solutions of the averaged and full equations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Full Counting Statistics of Spin Currents
Authors: Antonio Di Lorenzo, Yuli V. Nazarov
Date: 2003-12-01T19:31:36Z
Abstract:   We discuss how to detect fluctuating spin currents and derive full counting
statistics of electron spin transfers. It is interesting to consider several
detectors in series that simultaneously monitor different components of the
spins transferred. We have found that in general the statistics of the
measurement outcomes cannot be explained with the projection postulate and
essentially depends on the quantum dynamics of the detectors.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Optical pumping NMR in the compensated semiconductor InP:Fe
Authors: Atsushi Goto, Kenjiro Hashi, Tadashi Shimizu, Ryo Miyabe, Xiaogang Wen, Shinobu Ohki, Susumu Machida, Takahiro Iijima, Giyuu Kido
Date: 2003-12-01T07:22:08Z
Abstract:   The optical pumping NMR effect in the compensated semiconductor InP:Fe has
been investigated in terms of the dependences of photon energy (E_p), helicity
(sigma+-), and exposure time (tau_L) of infrared lights. The {31}P and {115}In
signal enhancements show large sigma+- asymmetries and anomalous oscillations
as a function of E_p. We find that (i) the oscillation period as a function of
E_p is similar for {31}P and {115}In and almost field independent in spite of
significant reduction of the enhancement in higher fields. (ii) A
characteristic time for buildup of the {31}P polarization under the light
exposure shows strong E_p-dependence, but is almost independent of sigma+-.
(iii) The buildup times for {31}P and {115}In are of the same order (10^3 s),
although the spin-lattice relaxation times (T_1) are different by more than
three orders of magnitude between them. The results are discussed in terms of
(1) discrete energy spectra due to donor-acceptor pairs (DAPs) in compensated
semiconductors, and (2) interplay between {31}P and dipolar ordered indium
nuclei, which are optically induced.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Non-saturating magnetoresistance in heavily disordered semiconductors
Authors: M. M. Parish, P. B. Littlewood
Date: 2003-12-01T04:11:25Z
Abstract:   The resistance of a homogeneous semiconductor increases quadratically with
magnetic field at low fields and, except in very special cases, saturates at
fields much larger than the inverse of the carrier mobility, a number typically
of order 1 Tesla. Here, we argue that a macroscopically disordered and strongly
inhomogeneous semiconductor will instead show a non-saturating
magnetoresistance, with typically a quasi-linear behaviour up to very large
fields, and possibly also extending down to very low fields, depending on the
degree of inhomogeneity. We offer this as a possible explanation of the
observed anomalously large magnetoresistance in doped silver chalcogenides.
Furthermore, our model of an inhomogeneous semiconductor can be developed into
magnetoresistive devices that possess a large, controllable, linear response.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamics of correlations in atomic Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: Krzysztof Goral, Thorsten Koehler, Thomas Gasenzer, Keith Burnett
Date: 2003-11-28T19:42:59Z
Abstract:   The Gross-Pitaevskii equation has been extremely successful in the theory of
weakly-interacting Bose-Einstein condensates. However, present-day experiments
reach beyond the regime of its validity due to the significant role of
correlations. We review a method of tackling the dynamics of correlations in
Bose condensed gases, in terms of noncommutative cumulants. This new approach
has a wide range of applicability in the areas of current interest, e.g. the
production of molecules and the manipulation of interactions in condensates. It
also offers an interesting perspective on the classical-field methods for
partly condensed Bose gases.


Category: cond-mat
Title: On the Recent Results of E835 Experiment at FNAL
Authors: A. A. Arkhipov
Date: 2003-11-28T17:25:36Z
Abstract:   In this note we briefly concern several recent results of E835 Experiment at
FNAL that are discussed in the framework of unified picture on hadronic spectra
elaborated in our early works. It has been established that new E835
Collaboration results provided an additional excellent confirmation of our
theoretical conception.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Sub- and Supersonic Heat Motion Induced by Femtosecond Laser Pulses
Authors: J. Marciak-Kozlowska, M. Kozlowski
Date: 2003-11-28T13:12:25Z
Abstract:   In this paper the superheating of electron plasma by femtosecond laser pulses
is investigated. With Heaviside thermal equation (Lasers in Engineering, 12,
(2002), p.17) the generation of superhot electrons is described. It is shown
that in hot electron plasma (i.e. with electron energies >5MeV) the thermal
shock waves can be generated. Key words: Femtosecond laser pulses; Hot electron
plasma; Shock thermal waves.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Coherence in Microchip Traps
Authors: Philipp Treutlein, Peter Hommelhoff, Tilo Steinmetz, Theodor W. Hänsch, Jakob Reichel
Date: 2003-11-27T22:31:42Z
Abstract:   We report the coherent manipulation of internal states of neutral atoms in a
magnetic microchip trap. Coherence lifetimes exceeding 1 s are observed with
atoms at distances of $5-130 \mu$m from the microchip surface. The coherence
lifetime in the chip trap is independent of atom-surface distance within our
measurement accuracy, and agrees well with the results of similar measurements
in macroscopic magnetic traps. Due to the absence of surface-induced
decoherence, a miniaturized atomic clock with a relative stability in the
$10^{-13}$ range can be realized. For applications in quantum information
processing, we propose to use microwave near-fields in the proximity of chip
wires to create potentials that depend on the internal state of the atoms.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Breakup of the Hydrogen Bond Network In Water:The Momentum Distribution
  of the Protons
Authors: G. Reiter, T. Abdul-Redah, J. C. LI, J. Mayers, P. Platzman
Date: 2003-11-27T18:03:13Z
Abstract:   Neutron Compton Scattering measurements presented here of the momentum
distribution of hydrogen in water at temperatures slightly below freezing to
the supercritical phase show a dramatic change in the distribution as the
hydrogen bond network becomes more disordered. Within a single particle
interpretation, the proton moves from an essentially harmonic well in ice to a
slightly anharmonic well in room temperature water, to a deeply anharmonic
potential in the supercritical phase that is best described by a double well
potential with a separation of the wells along the bond axis of about .3
Angstroms. Confining the supercritical water in the interstices of a C60 powder
enhances this anharmonicity. The changes in the distribution are consistent
with gas phase formation at the hydrophobic boundaries.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Temperature dependent Bogoliubov approximation in the classical fields
  approach to weakly interacting Bose gas
Authors: Miroslaw Brewczyk, Peter Borowski, Mariusz Gajda, Kazimierz Rzazewski
Date: 2003-11-27T14:25:03Z
Abstract:   A classical fields approximation to the finite temperature microcanonical
thermodynamics of weakly interacting Bose gas is applied to the idealized case
of atoms confined in a box with periodic boundary conditions. We analyze in
some detail the microcanonical temperature in the model. We also analyze the
spectral properties of classical amplitudes of the plane waves -- the
eigenmodes of the time averaged one--particle density matrix. Looking at the
zero momentum component -- the order parameter of the condensate, we obtain the
nonperturbative results for the chemical potential. Analogous analysis of the
other modes yields nonperturbative temperature dependent Bogoliubov frequencies
and their damping rates. Damping rates are linear functions of momenta in the
phonon range and show more complex behavior for the particle sector. Where
available, we make comparison with the analytic estimates of these quantities.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Correlations in interfering electrons irradiated by nonclassical
  microwaves
Authors: C. C. Chong, D. I. Tsomokos, A. Vourdas
Date: 2003-11-26T16:59:28Z
Abstract:   Electron interference in mesoscopic devices irradiated by external
non-classical microwaves, is considered. In the case of one-mode microwaves, it
is shown that both the average intensity and the spectral density of the
interfering electrons are sensitive to the quantum noise of the microwaves. The
results for various quantum states of the microwaves are compared and
contrasted with the classical case. Separable and entangled two-mode microwaves
are also considered and their effect on electron average intensity and
autocorrelation, is discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Atomic and molecular matter fields in periodic potentials
Authors: Klaus Molmer
Date: 2003-11-26T14:33:20Z
Abstract:   This paper deals with the conversion between atoms and molecules in optical
lattices. We show that in the absence of collisional interaction, the atomic
and molecular components in different lattice wells combine into states with
macroscopic condensate fractions, which can be observed as a strong diffraction
signal, if the particles are abruptly released from the lattice. The condensate
population, and the diffraction signal are governed not only by the mean number
of atoms or molecules in each well, but by the precise amplitudes on state
vector components with different numbers of particles. We discuss ways to
control these amplitudes and to maximize the condensate fraction in the
molecular formation process.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Non-equilibrium Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surfaces for molecular
  wires
Authors: D. S. Kosov
Date: 2003-11-26T11:44:32Z
Abstract:   We present a method for computing non-equilibrium, current-dependent
Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surfaces for molecular wires. Calculations
are performed for polyacetylene wire described by tight-binding model with
electron-phonon interactions. We find that dimerization of the polyacetylene
wire is amplified by electric current flow. We show that the boundary between
transparent and opaque black states of the wire is blue-shifted by current.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Manipulating the superfluid - Mott insulator transition of a Bose -
  Einstein condensate in an amplitude - modulated optical lattice
Authors: G. M. Genkin
Date: 2003-11-25T22:01:53Z
Abstract:   The superfluid - Mott insulator transition in a BEC confined in an amplitude
- modulated optical lattice can be manipulated by the modulation strength. Two
standing laser waves of main and sideband frequencies of an optical lattice
induce a Raman transition; due to resonant Raman driving the critical value of
the transition parameter depends on the modulation strength and the detuning
from resonance and can be tuned to a given value. It is shown that there is an
interval of the initial MI phase, in which a modulation switches the MI phase
to the SF phase.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The duration of recessions follows an exponential not a power law
Authors: Ian Wright
Date: 2003-11-25T18:48:21Z
Abstract:   Ormerod and Mounfield analysed GDP data of 17 leading capitalist economies
from 1870 to 1994 and concluded that the frequency of the duration of
recessions is consistent with a power-law. But in fact the data is consistent
with an exponential (Boltzmann-Gibbs) law.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Direct measure of the exciton formation in quantum wells from time
  resolved interband luminescence
Authors: J. Szczytko, L. Kappei, J. Berney, F. Morier-Genoud, M. T. Portella-Oberli, B. Deveaud
Date: 2003-11-25T09:51:32Z
Abstract:   We present the results of a detailed time resolved luminescence study carried
out on a very high quality InGaAs quantum well sample where the contributions
at the energy of the exciton and at the band edge can be clearly separated. We
perform this experiment with a spectral resolution and a sensitivity of the
set-up allowing to keep the observation of these two separate contributions
over a broad range of times and densities. This allows us to directly evidence
the exciton formation time, which depends on the density as expected from
theory. We also evidence the dominant contribution of a minority of excitons to
the luminescence signal, and the absence of thermodynamical equilibrium at low
densities.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dissipation in Nanocrystalline-Diamond Nanomechanical Resonators
Authors: A. B. Hutchinson, P. A. Truitt, K. C. Schwab, L. Sekaric, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead, J. E. Butler
Date: 2003-11-24T21:30:53Z
Abstract:   We have measured the dissipation and frequency of nanocrystalline-diamond
nanomechanical resonators with resonant frequencies between 13.7 MHz and 157.3
MHz, over a temperature range of 1.4-274 K. Using both magnetomotive network
analysis and a novel time-domain ring-down technique, we have found the
dissipation in this material to have a temperature dependence roughly following
T^0.2, with Q^-1 = 10^-4 at low temperatures. The frequency dependence of a
large dissipation feature at ~35-55 K is consistent with thermal activation
over a 0.02 eV barrier with an attempt frequency of 10 GHz.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Simulating spin-boson dynamics with stochastic Liouville-von Neumann
  equations
Authors: J. T. Stockburger
Date: 2003-11-24T15:35:03Z
Abstract:   Based on recently derived exact stochastic Liouville-von Neumann equations,
several strategies for the efficient simulation of open quantum systems are
developed and tested on the spin-boson model. The accuracy and efficiency of
these simulations is verified for several test cases including both coherent
and incoherent dynamics, involving timescales differing by several orders of
magnitude. Using simulations with a time-dependent field, the time evolution of
coherences in the reduced density matrix is investigated. Even in the case of
weak damping, pronounced preparation effects are found. These indicate hidden
coherence in the interacting system which can only be indirectly observed in
the basis of the reduced quantum dynamics.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Phases of hot nuclear matter at subnuclear densities
Authors: Gentaro Watanabe, Katsuhiko Sato, Kenji Yasuoka, Toshikazu Ebisuzaki
Date: 2003-11-24T11:20:18Z
Abstract:   Structure of hot dense matter at subnuclear densities is investigated by
quantum molecular dynamics (QMD) simulations. We analyze nucleon distributions
and nuclear shapes using two-point correlation functions and Minkowski
functionals to determine the phase-separation line and to classify the phase of
nuclear matter in terms of the nuclear structure. Obtained phase diagrams show
that the density of the phase boundaries between the different nuclear
structures decreases with increasing temperature due to the thermal expansion
of nuclear matter region. The critical temperature for the phase separation is
$\agt 6$ MeV for the proton fraction $x=0.5$ and $\agt 5$ MeV for $x=0.3$. Our
result suggests the existence of "spongelike" phases with negative Euler
characteristic in addition to the simple "pasta" phases in supernova cores
until $T \alt 3$ MeV.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Group classification of (1+1)-Dimensional Schrödinger Equations with
  Potentials and Power Nonlinearities
Authors: Roman O. Popovych, Nataliya M. Ivanova, Homayoon Eshraghi
Date: 2003-11-24T10:28:33Z
Abstract:   We perform the complete group classification in the class of nonlinear
Schr\"odinger equations of the form
$i\psi_t+\psi_{xx}+|\psi|^\gamma\psi+V(t,x)\psi=0$ where $V$ is an arbitrary
complex-valued potential depending on $t$ and $x,$ $\gamma$ is a real non-zero
constant. We construct all the possible inequivalent potentials for which these
equations have non-trivial Lie symmetries using a combination of algebraic and
compatibility methods. The proposed approach can be applied to solving group
classification problems for a number of important classes of differential
equations arising in mathematical physics.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Universal depinning force fluctuations of an elastic line: Application
  to finite temperature behavior
Authors: Damien Vandembroucq, Rune Skoe, Stephane Roux
Date: 2003-11-20T16:48:02Z
Abstract:   The depinning of an elastic line in a random medium is studied via an
extremal model. The latter gives access to the instantaneous depinning force
for each successive conformation of the line. Based on conditional statistics
the universal and non-universal parts of the depinning force distribution can
be obtained. In particular the singular behavior close to a (macroscopic)
critical threshold is obtained as a function of the roughness exponent of the
front. We show moreover that the advance of the front is controlled by a very
tenuous set of subcritical sites. Extension of the extremal model to a finite
temperature is proposed, the scaling properties of which can be discussed based
on the statistics of depinning force at zero temperature.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Magneto-Gyrotropic Photogalvanic Effect in Semiconductor Quantum Wells
Authors: V. V. Bel'kov, S. D. Ganichev, Petra Schneider, S. Giglberger, E. L. Ivchenko, S. A. Tarasenko, W. Wegscheider, D. Weiss, W. Prettl
Date: 2003-11-20T10:16:21Z
Abstract:   We investigate both experimentally and theoretically, the magneto-gyrotropic
photogalvanic effect in zinc-blende based quantum wells with $C_{2v}$
point-group symmetry using optical excitation in the terahertz frequency range.
The investigated frequencies cause intra-subband but no inter-band and
inter-subband transitions. While at normal incidence the photocurrent vanishes
at zero magnetic field, it is shown that an in-plane magnetic field generates
photocurrents both for polarized and unpolarized excitation. In general the
spin-galvanic effect, caused by circularly polarized light, and the
magneto-gyrotropic effect, caused by unpolarized excitation, is superimposed.
It is shown that in the case of two specific geometries both effects are
separable.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Exact renormalization group calculation of the shift in T_c for the
  weakly interacting Bose gas
Authors: J. P Blaizot, R. Mendez-Galain, N. Wschebor
Date: 2003-11-19T20:07:03Z
Abstract:   This paper has been withdrawn by the authors. We have discovered an error in
our estimate of c, leading to a larger discrepancy with the exact result. This
prevents us to judge the quality of the approximation from its leading order
prediction, and we withdraw the paper until we have completed the next to
leading order calculation


Category: cond-mat
Title: Order book approach to price impact
Authors: Philipp Weber, Bernd Rosenow
Date: 2003-11-19T18:06:29Z
Abstract:   Buying and selling stocks causes price changes, which are described by the
price impact function. To explain the shape of this function, we study the
Island ECN orderbook. In addition to transaction data, the orderbook contains
information about potential supply and demand for a stock. The virtual price
impact calculated from this information is four times stronger than the actual
one and explains it only partially. However, we find a strong anticorrelation
between price changes and order flow, which strongly reduces the virtual price
impact and provides for a quantitative explanation of the empirical price
impact function.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Spin-polarized current amplification and spin injection in magnetic
  bipolar transistors
Authors: Jaroslav Fabian, Igor Zutic
Date: 2003-11-19T17:45:53Z
Abstract:   The magnetic bipolar transistor (MBT) is a bipolar junction transistor with
an equilibrium and nonequilibrium spin (magnetization) in the emitter, base, or
collector. The low-injection theory of spin-polarized transport through MBTs
and of a more general case of an array of magnetic {\it p-n} junctions is
developed and illustrated on several important cases. Two main physical
phenomena are discussed: electrical spin injection and spin control of current
amplification (magnetoamplification). It is shown that a source spin can be
injected from the emitter to the collector. If the base of an MBT has an
equilibrium magnetization, the spin can be injected from the base to the
collector by intrinsic spin injection. The resulting spin accumulation in the
collector is proportional to $\exp(qV_{be}/k_BT)$, where $q$ is the proton
charge, $V_{be}$ is the bias in the emitter-base junction, and $k_B T$ is the
thermal energy. To control the electrical current through MBTs both the
equilibrium and the nonequilibrium spin can be employed. The equilibrium spin
controls the magnitude of the equilibrium electron and hole densities, thereby
controlling the currents. Increasing the equilibrium spin polarization of the
base (emitter) increases (decreases) the current amplification. If there is a
nonequilibrium spin in the emitter, and the base or the emitter has an
equilibrium spin, a spin-valve effect can lead to a giant magnetoamplification
effect, where the current amplifications for the parallel and antiparallel
orientations of the the equilibrium and nonequilibrium spins differ
significantly. The theory is elucidated using qualitative analyses and is
illustrated on an MBT example with generic materials parameters.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Pressure effects on charge, spin, and metal-insulator transitions in
  narrow bandwidth manganite Pr$_{1-x}$Ca$_{x}$MnO$_{3}$
Authors: Congwu Cui, Trevor A. Tyson
Date: 2003-11-19T03:08:51Z
Abstract:   Pressure effects on the charge and spin states and the relation between the
ferromagnetic and metallic states were explored on the small bandwidth
manganite Pr$_{1-x}$Ca$_{x}$MnO$_{3}$ (x = 0.25, 0.3, 0.35). Under pressure,
the charge ordering state is suppressed and a ferromagnetic metallic state is
induced in all three samples. The metal-insulator transition temperature
(T$_{MI}$) increases with pressure below a critical point P*, above which
T$_{MI}$ decreases and the material becomes insulating as at the ambient
pressure. The e$_{g}$ electron bandwidth and/or band-filling mediate the
pressure effects on the metal-insulator transition and the magnetic transition.
In the small bandwidth and low doping concentration compound (x = 0.25), the
T$_{MI}$ and Curie temperature (T$_{C}$) change with pressure in a reverse way
and do not couple under pressure. In the x = 0.3 compound, the relation of
T$_{MI}$ and T$_{C}$ shows a critical behavior: They are coupled in the range
of $\sim$0.8-5 GPa and decoupled outside of this range. In the x = 0.35
compound, T$_{MI}$ and T$_{C}$ are coupled in the measured pressure range where
a ferromagnetic state is present.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Snell's law for surface electrons: Refraction of an electron gas imaged
  in real space
Authors: Jascha Repp, Gerhard Meyer, Karl-Heinz Rieder
Date: 2003-11-18T15:06:00Z
Abstract:   On NaCl(100)/Cu(111) an interface state band is observed that descends from
the surface-state band of the clean copper surface. This band exhibits a
Moire-pattern-induced one-dimensional band gap, which is accompanied by strong
standing-wave patterns, as revealed in low-temperature scanning tunneling
microscopy images. At NaCl island step edges, one can directly see the
refraction of these standing waves, which obey Snell's refraction law.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Spherical Crystallography: Virus Buckling and Grain Boundary Scars
Authors: David R. Nelson
Date: 2003-11-18T14:04:47Z
Abstract:   Ordered states on spheres require a minimum number of topological defects.
For the case of crystalline order, triangular lattices must be interrupted by
an array of at least 12 five-fold disclination defects, typically sitting at
the vertices of an icosahedron. For R>>a, where R is the sphere radius and a
the particle spacing, the energy associated with these defects is very large.
This energy can be lowered, however, either by buckling, as appears to be the
case for large viruses, or by introducing unusual finite length grain boundary
scars. The latter have been observed recently for colloidal particles adsorbed
onto water droplets in oil.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Structure and energetics of helium adsorption on nanosurfaces
Authors: Patrick Huang, Heather D. Whitley, K. Birgitta Whaley
Date: 2003-11-18T01:25:56Z
Abstract:   The ground and excited state properties of small helium clusters, 4He_N,
containing nanoscale (~3-10 Angstroms) planar aromatic molecules have been
studied with quantum Monte Carlo methods. Ground state structures and energies
are obtained from importance-sampled, rigid-body diffusion Monte Carlo. Excited
state energies due to helium vibrational motion are evaluated using the
projection operator, imaginary time spectral evolution technique. We examine
the adsorption of N helium atoms (N less than or equal to 24) on a series of
planar aromatic molecules (benzene, naphthalene, anthracene, tetracene,
phthalocyanine). The first layer of helium atoms is well-localized on the
molecule surface, and we find well-defined localized excitations due to
in-plane vibrational motion of helium on the molecule surface. We discuss the
implications of these confined excitations for the molecule spectroscopy.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Towards mechanical entanglement in nano-electromechanical devices
Authors: J. Eisert, M. B. Plenio, S. Bose, J. Hartley
Date: 2003-11-18T01:09:59Z
Abstract:   We study arrays of mechanical oscillators in the quantum domain and
demonstrate how the motions of distant oscillators can be entangled without the
need for control of individual oscillators and without a direct interaction
between them. These oscillators are thought of as being members of an array of
nano-electromechanical resonators with a voltage being applicable between
neighboring resonators. Sudden non-adiabatic switching of the interaction
results in a squeezing of the states of the mechanical oscillators, leading to
an entanglement transport in chains of mechanical oscillators. We discuss
spatial dimensions, Q-factors, temperatures and decoherence sources in some
detail, and find a distinct robustness of the entanglement in the canonical
coordinates in such a scheme. We also briefly discuss the challenging aspect of
detection of the generated entanglement.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Imaging density disturbances in water with 41.3 attosecond time
  resolution
Authors: P. Abbamonte, K. D. Finkelstein, M. D. Collins, S. M. Gruner
Date: 2003-11-17T20:45:58Z
Abstract:   We show that the momentum flexibility of inelastic x-ray scattering may be
exploited to invert its loss function, alowing real time imaging of density
disturbances in a medium. We show the disturbance arising from a point source
in liquid water, with a resolution of 41.3 attoseconds ($4.13 \times 10^{-17}$
sec) and 1.27 $\AA$ ($1.27 \times 10^{-8}$ cm). This result is used to
determine the structure of the electron cloud around a photoexcited molecule in
solution, as well as the wake generated in water by a 9 MeV gold ion. We draw
an analogy with pump-probe techniques and suggest that energy-loss scattering
may be applied more generally to the study of attosecond phenomena.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Stochastic energy-cascade model for 1+1 dimensional fully developed
  turbulence
Authors: Juergen Schmiegel, Jochen Cleve, Hans C. Eggers, Bruce R. Pearson, Martin Greiner
Date: 2003-11-17T11:26:13Z
Abstract:   Geometrical random multiplicative cascade processes are often used to model
positive-valued multifractal fields such as the energy dissipation in fully
developed turbulence. We propose a dynamical generalization describing the
energy dissipation in terms of a continuous and homogeneous stochastic field in
one space and one time dimension. In the model, correlations originate in the
overlap of the respective spacetime histories of field amplitudes. The
theoretical two- and three-point correlation functions are found to be in good
agreement with their equal-time counterparts extracted from wind tunnel
turbulent shear flow data.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Tunneling effect of the spin-2 Bose condensate driven by external
  magnetic fields
Authors: Zhao-xian Yu, Zhi-yong Jiao
Date: 2003-11-15T08:20:39Z
Abstract:   In this paper, we have studied tunneling effect of the spin-2 Bose condensate
driven by external magnetic field. We find that the population transfers among
spin-0 and spin-$\pm1$, spin-0 and spin-$\pm2$ exhibit the step structure under
the external cosinusoidal magnetic field respectively, but there do not exist
step structure among spin-$\pm1$ and spin-$\pm2$. The tunneling current among
spin-$\pm1$ and spin-$\pm2$ may exhibit periodically oscillation behavior, but
among spin-0 and spin-$\pm1$, spin-0 and spin-$\pm2$, the tunneling currents
exhibit irregular oscillation behavior.


Category: cond-mat
Title: A non covariant fermionic determinant and its connection to Luttinger
  systems
Authors: Aníbal Iucci, Carlos Naón
Date: 2003-11-14T21:24:00Z
Abstract:   We consider a fermionic determinant associated to a non covariant Quantum
Field Theory used to describe a non relativistic system in (1+1) dimensions. By
exploiting the freedom that arises when Lorentz invariance is not mandatory, we
determine the heat-kernel regulating operator so as to reproduce the correct
dispersion relations of the bosonic excitations. We also derive the Hamiltonian
of the functionally bosonized model and the corresponding currents. In this way
we were able to establish the precise heat-kernel regularization that yields
complete agreement between the path-integral and operational approaches to the
bosonization of the Tomonaga-Luttinger model.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Buffer gas cooling and trapping of atoms with small magnetic moments
Authors: J. G. E. Harris, R. A. Michniak, S. V. Nguyen, W. Ketterle, J. M Doyle
Date: 2003-11-14T16:25:08Z
Abstract:   Buffer gas cooling was extended to trap atoms with small magnetic moment
(mu). For mu greater than or equal to 3mu_B, 1e12 atoms were buffer gas cooled,
trapped, and thermally isolated in ultra high vacuum with roughly unit
efficiency. For mu < 3mu_B, the fraction of atoms remaining after full thermal
isolation was limited by two processes: wind from the rapid removal of the
buffer gas and desorbing helium films. In our current apparatus we trap atoms
with mu greater than or equal to 1.1mu_B, and thermally isolate atoms with mu
greater than or equal to 2mu_B. Extrapolation of our results combined with
simulations of the loss processes indicate that it is possible to trap and
evaporatively cool mu = 1mu_B atoms using buffer gas cooling.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Magnetization reversal and spin dynamics exchange in biased F/AF
  bilayers probed with complex permeability spectra
Authors: David Spenato, Jamal Ben Youssef, Henri Le Gall
Date: 2003-11-14T10:26:29Z
Abstract:   The spin dynamics of the ferromagnetic pinned layer of
ferro-antiferromagnetic coupled NiFe/MnNi bilayers is investigated in a broad
frequency range (30 MHz-6 GHz). A phenomenological model based on the
Landau-Lifshitz equation for the complex permeability of the F/AF bilayer is
proposed. The experimental results are compared to theoretical predictions. We
show that the resonance frequencies, measured during the magnetization, are
likewise hysteretic.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Magnon squeezing in an antiferromagnet: reducing the spin noise below
  the standard quantum limit
Authors: J. Zhao, A. V. Bragas, D. J. Lockwood, R. Merlin
Date: 2003-11-13T21:45:51Z
Abstract:   At absolute zero temperature, thermal noise vanishes when a physical system
is in its ground state, but quantum noise remains as a fundamental limit to the
accuracy of experimental measurements. Such a limitation, however, can be
mitigated by the formation of squeezed states. Quantum mechanically, a squeezed
state is a time-varying superposition of states for which the noise of a
particular observable is reduced below that of the ground state at certain
times. Quantum squeezing has been achieved for a variety of systems, including
the electromagnetic field, atomic vibrations in solids and molecules, and
atomic spins, but not so far for magnetic systems. Here we report on an
experimental demonstration of spin wave (i.e., magnon) squeezing. Our method
uses femtosecond optical pulses to generate correlations involving pairs of
magnons in an antiferromagnetic insulator, MnF2. These correlations lead to
quantum squeezing in which the fluctuations of the magnetization of a
crystallographic unit cell vary periodically in time and are reduced below that
of the ground state quantum noise. The mechanism responsible for this squeezing
is stimulated second order Raman scattering by magnon pairs. Such squeezed
states have important ramifications in the emerging fields of spintronics and
quantum computing involving magnetic spin states or the spin-orbit coupling
mechanism.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Decoherence in Nanostructures and Quantum Systems
Authors: R. F. O'Connell
Date: 2003-11-13T15:24:59Z
Abstract:   Decoherence phenomena are pervasive in the arena of nanostructures but
perhaps even more so in the study of the fundamentals of quantum mechanics and
quantum computation. Since there has been little overlap between the studies in
both arenas, this is an attempt to bridge the gap. Topics stressed include (a)
wave packet spreading in a dissipative environment, a key element in all
arenas, (b) the definition of a quantitative measure of decoherence, (c) the
near zero and zero temperature limit, and (d) the key role played by initial
conditions: system and environment entangled at all times so that one must use
the density matrix (or Wigner distribution) for the complete system or
initially decoupled system and environment so that use of a reduced density
matrix or reduced Wigner distribution is feasible. Our approach utilizes
generalized quantum Langevin equations and Wigner distributions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Spectroscopy of subthreshold inelastic radiation-induced processes in
  cryocrystals
Authors: A. N. Ogurtsov
Date: 2003-11-13T15:06:23Z
Abstract:   A review is given on the recent spectroscopic studies of the electronic
excitation induced processes of large-scale atomic displacements in atomic
cryocrystals, including defect formation, atomic and molecular desorption.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Resonance photon yield from solid Xe below the bottom of the n=1
  excitonic band
Authors: A. N. Ogurtsov, E. V. Savchenko, S. Vielhauer, G. Zimmerer
Date: 2003-11-13T14:19:27Z
Abstract:   The results of time-resolved spectroscopic study of photon yield from solid
Xe below the bottom of the lowest excitonic band under selective
photoexcitation by synchrotron radiation are presented


Category: cond-mat
Title: Self-trapped excitons in solid Kr: Time resolved study
Authors: A. N. Ogurtsov, E. V. Savchenko, S. Vielhauer, G. Zimmerer
Date: 2003-11-13T14:13:52Z
Abstract:   The results of time-resolved study of two types of self-trapped excitons in
solid Kr are presented


Category: cond-mat
Title: Molecular center photoabsorption in solid Ar
Authors: A. N. Ogurtsov, E. V. Savchenko, S. Vielhauer, G. Zimmerer
Date: 2003-11-13T14:07:09Z
Abstract:   Recent experimental data on spectroscopic determination of photoabsorption of
molecular centers in solid Ar is presented.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The conundrum of stock versus bond prices
Authors: Sergei Maslov, Bertrand M. Roehner
Date: 2003-11-13T12:01:39Z
Abstract:   In a general way, stock and bond prices do not display any significant
correlation. Yet, if we concentrate our attention on specific episodes marked
by a crash followed by a rebound, then we observe that stock prices have a
strong connection with interest rates on the one hand, and with bond yield
spreads on the other hand. That second relationship is particularly stable in
the course of time having been observed for over 140 years. Throughout the
paper we use a quasi-experimental approach. By observing how markets respond to
well-defined exogenous shocks (such as the shock of September 11, 2001) we are
able to determine how investors organize their ``flight to safety'': which safe
haven they select, how long their collective panic lasts, and so on. As
rebounds come to an end the correlation of stock and bond prices fades away, a
clear sign that the collective behavior of investors loses some of its
coherence; this observation can be used as an objective criterion for assessing
the end of a market rebound. Based on the behavior of investors, we introduce a
distinction between ``genuine stock market rallies'', as opposed to spurious
rallies such as those brought about by the buyback programs implemented by
large companies. The paper ends with a discussion of testable predictions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Does the price multiplier effect also hold for stocks?
Authors: Sergei Maslov, Bertrand M. Roehner
Date: 2003-11-13T11:46:08Z
Abstract:   The price multiplier effect provides precious insight into the behavior of
investors during episodes of speculative trading. It tells us that the higher
the price of an asset is (within a set of similar assets) the more its price is
likely to increase during the upgoing phase of a speculative price peak. In
short, instead of being risk averse, as is often assumed, investors rather seem
to be ``risk prone''. While this effect is known to hold for several sorts of
assets, it has not yet been possible to test it for stocks because the price of
one share has no intrinsic significance which means that one cannot say that a
stock $ A $ is more expensive than a stock $ B $ on the basis of its price. In
this paper we show that the price-dividend ratio gives a good basis for
assessing the price of stocks in an intrinsic way. When this alternative
measure is used instead, it turns out that the price multiplier effect also
holds for stocks, at least if one concentrates on samples of companies which
are sufficiently homogeneous.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Diverging Entanglement Length in Gapped Quantum Spin Systems
Authors: F. Verstraete, M. A. Martin-Delgado, J. I. Cirac
Date: 2003-11-13T10:21:54Z
Abstract:   We prove the existence of gapped quantum Hamiltonians whose ground states
exhibit an infinite entanglement length, as opposed to their finite correlation
length. Using the concept of entanglement swapping, the localizable
entanglement is calculated exactly for valence bond and finitely correlated
states, and the existence of the so--called string-order parameter is
discussed. We also report on evidence that the ground state of an
antiferromagnetic chain can be used as a perfect quantum channel if local
measurements on the individual spins can be implemented.


Category: cond-mat
Title: An ab initio cluster study of atomic oxygen chemisorption on Ga-rich
  GaAs(100) (2x1) and beta(4x2) surfaces
Authors: Michael L. Mayo, Asok K. Ray
Date: 2003-11-13T02:33:24Z
Abstract:   Ab initio self-consistent total energy calculations using second order
Moller-Plesset perturbation theory and Hay-Wadt effective core potentials for
gallium and arsenic have been used to investigate the chemisorption of atomic
oxygen on the Ga-rich GaAs (100) (2 x 1) and beta(4 x 2) surfaces. Finite sized
hydrogen saturated clusters with the experimental zinc-blende lattice constant
of 5.654 angstroms and the energy optimized surface Ga dimer bond length of
2.758 angstroms have been used to model the semiconductor surface. We present
the energetics of chemisorption on the (100) surface layer including adsorption
beneath the surface layer at two interstitial sites. Chemisorption energies,
nearest surface neighbor Ga-O bond lengths, and homo-lumo gaps are reported for
all considered sites of chemisorption and compared with published results in
the literature on O adsorption on the GaAs surface. Results are also compared
with our previous results on hydrogen chemisorption on the same GaAs surface.
Possibilities of transition of the surface from a semi-conducting state to a
semi-insulating state are also discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Many-body aspects of positron annihilation in the electron gas
Authors: V. Apaja, S. Denk, E. Krotscheck
Date: 2003-11-12T21:52:49Z
Abstract:   We investigate positron annihilation in electron liquid as a case study for
many-body theory, in particular the optimized Fermi Hypernetted Chain (FHNC-EL)
method. We examine several approximation schemes and show that one has to go up
to the most sophisticated implementation of the theory available at the moment
in order to get annihilation rates that agree reasonably well with experimental
data. Even though there is basically just one number to look at, the
electron-positron pair distribution function at zero distance, it is exactly
this number that dictates how the full pair distribution behaves: In most
cases, it falls off monotonously towards unity as the distance increases. Cases
where the electron-positron pair distribution exhibits a dip are precursors to
the formation of bound electron--positron pairs. The formation of
electron-positron pairs is indicated by a divergence of the FHNC-EL equations,
from this we can estimate the density regime where positrons must be localized.
This occurs in our calculations in the range 9.4 <= r_s <=10, where r_s is the
dimensionless density parameter of the electron liquid.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Influence of mass difference on dynamic properties of isotope mixtures
Authors: N. Kiriushcheva, S. V. Kuzmin
Date: 2003-11-12T18:42:33Z
Abstract:   We present the results of a Molecular Dynamics computer simulations of a two
component isotope mixture of Lennard-Jones particles, monodisperse in size but
different in masses, at a fixed average density and temperature. We study
changes in properties that result from mass heterogeneity, by measuring the
pair distribution function, diffusion coefficient, velocity autocorrelation
function, non-Gaussian and isotope effect parameters, as functions of the
degree of mass difference. Our results show that if static properties are not
influenced by a variation of mass variation, the dynamic properties are
significantly affected and even exhibit the presence of ``critical'' values in
the mass difference. We also demonstrate that our model gives a simple contra
example to a recently proposed a universal scaling law for atomic diffusion in
condensed matter [M. Dzugudov, Nature, v.381, 137 (1996)].


Category: cond-mat
Title: Separation of the first- and second-order contributions in magneto-optic
  Kerr effect magnetometry of epitaxial FeMn/NiFe bilayers
Authors: T. Mewes, H. Nembach, M. Rickart, B. Hillebrands
Date: 2003-11-12T14:49:50Z
Abstract:   The influence of second-order magneto-optic effects on Kerr effect
magnetometry of epitaxial exchange coupled FeMn/NiFe-bilayers is investigated.
A procedure for separation of the first- and second-order contributions is
presented. The full angular dependence of both contributions during the
magnetization reversal is extracted from the experimental data and presented
using gray scaled magnetization reversal diagrams. The theoretical description
of the investigated system is based on an extended Stoner-Wohlfarth model,
which includes an induced unidirectional and fourfold anisotropy in the
ferromagnet, caused by the coupling to the antiferromagnet. The agreement
between the experimental data and the theoretical model for both the first- and
second-order contributions are good, although a coherent reversal of the
magnetization is assumed in the model.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Stations, trains and small-world networks
Authors: Katherine A Seaton, Lisa M Hackett
Date: 2003-11-11T22:39:15Z
Abstract:   The clustering coefficient, path length and average vertex degree of two
urban train line networks have been calculated. The results are compared with
theoretical predictions for appropriate random bipartite graphs. They have also
been compared with one another to investigate the effect of architecture on the
small-world properties.


Category: cond-mat
Title: High-Temperature Atomic Superfluidity in Lattice Boson-Fermion Mixtures
Authors: F. Illuminati, A. Albus
Date: 2003-11-11T20:46:16Z
Abstract:   We consider atomic Bose-Fermi mixtures in optical lattices and study the
superfluidity of fermionic atoms due to s-wave pairing induced by boson-fermion
interactions. We prove that the induced fermion-fermion coupling is always {\it
attractive} if the boson-boson on site interaction is repulsive, and predict
the existence of an enhanced BEC--BCS crossover as the strength of the lattice
potential is varied. We show that for direct on-site fermion-fermion {\it
repulsion}, the induced attraction can give rise to superfluidity via s-wave
pairing, at striking variance with the case of pure systems of fermionic atoms
with direct repulsive interactions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Antilocalization in gated 2D quantum well structures with composition
  gradient
Authors: A. V. Germanenko, G. M. Minkov, O. E. Rut, A. A. Sherstobitov, B. N. Zvonkov
Date: 2003-11-11T14:11:03Z
Abstract:   Low-field magnetoconductivity caused by the quantum interference is studied
in the gated 2D quantum well structures with the composition gradient. It is
shown that the Dresselhaus mechanism well describes an antilocalization minimum
on the conductivity-magnetic field curve.


Category: cond-mat
Title: First-principles study of electron transport through $C_{20}$ cages
Authors: Megumi Otani, Tomoya Ono, Kikuji Hirose
Date: 2003-11-08T11:36:47Z
Abstract:   Electron transport properties of C$_{20}$ molecules suspended between gold
electrodes are investigated using first-principles calculations. Our study
reveals that the conductances are quite sensitive to the number of C$_{20}$
molecules between electrodes: the conductances of C$_{20}$ monomers are near 1
G$_{0}$, while those of dimers are markedly smaller, since incident electrons
easily pass the C$_{20}$ molecules and are predominantly scattered at the
C$_{20}$-C$_{20}$ junctions. Moreover, we find both channel currents locally
circulating the outermost carbon atoms.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Magnetic and thermodynamic properties of RMnO$_3$ (R = Pr, Nd)
Authors: J. Hemberger, M. Brando, R. Wehn, V. Yu. Ivanov, A. A. Mukhin, A. M. Balbashov, A. Loidl
Date: 2003-11-07T16:24:15Z
Abstract:   The ground state properties of the pure perovskite compounds PrMnO$_3$ and
NdMnO$_3$ were investigated by magnetization, magnetic AC susceptibility and
specific heat measurements. A strongly anisotropic behavior has been detected
for temperatures below the antiferromagnetic phase transition $T_N$~100K. The
susceptibility and the weak spontaneous ferromagnetic moment appear to be
different in both compounds due to different anisotropic rare earth
contributions. The specific heat shows strong Schottky type contributions at
low temperatures, which for NdMnO$_3$ strongly depend on the magnetic field. A
spin reorientation phase transition (spin-flop type) induced by a magnetic
field along b axis was observed in NdMnO$_3$ at H~110kOe and T=5K. All results
can consistently be explained by anisotropic contributions of the rare earth
ions: In PrMnO$_3$ the electronic ground state is determined by a low lying
quasidoublet split by the crystal field ~19 K. In NdMnO$_3$ the Kramers doublet
is split by an exchange Nd-Mn field (~20K).


Category: cond-mat
Title: Ground State Energy of the Two-Component Charged Bose Gas
Authors: Elliott H. Lieb, Jan Philip Solovej
Date: 2003-11-07T15:43:39Z
Abstract:   We continue the study of the two-component charged Bose gas initiated by
Dyson in 1967. He showed that the ground state energy for $N$ particles is at
least as negative as $-CN^{7/5}$ for large $N$ and this power law was verified
by a lower bound found by Conlon, Lieb and Yau in 1988. Dyson conjectured that
the exact constant $C$ was given by a mean-field minimization problem that
used, as input, Foldy's calculation (using Bogolubov's 1947 formalism) for the
one-component gas. Earlier we showed that Foldy's calculation is exact insofar
as a lower bound of his form was obtained. In this paper we do the same thing
for Dyson's conjecture. The two-component case is considerably more difficult
because the gas is very non-homogeneous in its ground state.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Instabilities of a Bose-Einstein condensate in a periodic potential: an
  experimental investigation
Authors: M. Cristiani, O. Morsch, N. Malossi, M. Jona-Lasinio, M. Anderlini, E. Courtade, E. Arimondo
Date: 2003-11-07T10:43:47Z
Abstract:   By accelerating a Bose-Einstein condensate in a controlled way across the
edge of the Brillouin zone of a 1D optical lattice, we investigate the
stability of the condensate in the vicinity of the zone edge. Through an
analysis of the visibility of the interference pattern after a time-of-flight
and the widths of the interference peaks, we characterize the onset of
instability as the acceleration of the lattice is decreased. We briefly discuss
the significance of our results with respect to recent theoretical work.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Anomalous Hall effect in paramagnetic two dimensional systems
Authors: Dimitrie Culcer, Allan MacDonald, Qian Niu
Date: 2003-11-06T23:25:37Z
Abstract:   We investigate the possibility of observing the anomalous Hall effect (AHE)
in two dimensional paramagnetic systems. We apply the semiclassical equations
of motion to carriers in the conduction and valence bands of wurtzite and
zincblende quantum wells in the exchange field generated by magnetic impurities
and we calculate the anomalous Hall conductivity based on the Berry phase
corrections to the carrier velocity. We show that under certain circumstances
this conductivity approaches one half of the conductance quantum. We consider
the effect of an external magnetic field and show that for a small enough field
the theory is unaltered.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Cure to the Landau-Pomeranchuk and Associated Long-Wavelength
  Fermi-surface Instabilities on Lattices
Authors: C. M. Varma
Date: 2003-11-06T21:55:50Z
Abstract:   The cure to the $\ell=1$ Landau-Pomeranchuk (L-P) instabilities in
translationally invariant fermions is shown to be a state with an anisotropic
gap at the fermi-surface. For higher $\ell$ and for fermions on a lattice,
general criteria for long wavelength instabilities and their cure are found in
terms of the derivatives of the single particle self-energy with respect to
momentum for spin-symmetric instabilities and with respect to magnetic field
for spin-antisymmetric instabilities. The results may be relevant to
identifying hidden order parameters found in many metals.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Raman Amplification of Matter Waves
Authors: Dominik Schneble, Gretchen K. Campbell, Erik W. Streed, Micah Boyd, David E. Pritchard, Wolfgang Ketterle
Date: 2003-11-06T18:34:57Z
Abstract:   We demonstrate a Raman amplifier for matter-waves, where the amplified atoms
and the gain medium are in two different hyperfine states. This amplifier is
based on a novel form of superradiance that arises from self-stimulated Raman
scattering in a Bose-Einstein condensate.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Alloy effects in GaInN/GaN heterostructures
Authors: Duc Phuong Nguyen, Nicolas Regnault, Robson Ferreira, Gerald Bastard
Date: 2003-11-06T16:07:59Z
Abstract:   We show that the large band offsets between GaN and InN and the heavy carrier
effective masses preclude the use of the Virtual Crystal Approximation to
describe the electronic structure of Ga_(1-x)In_(x)N/GaN heterostructures while
this approximation works very well for the Ga_(1-x)In_(x)As/GaAs
heterostructures.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Transverse negative magnetoresistance of 2D structures in the presence
  of strong in-plane magnetic field: weak localization as a probe of interface
  roughness
Authors: G. M. Minkov, O. E. Rut, A. V. Germanenko, A. A. Sherstobitov, B. N. Zvonkov, D. O. Filatov
Date: 2003-11-06T09:41:24Z
Abstract:   The interference induced transverse negative magnetoresistance of
GaAs/InGaAs/GaAs quantum well heterostructures has been studied in the presence
of strong in-plane magnetic field. It is shown that effect of in-plane magnetic
field is determined by the interface roughness and strongly depends on the
relationship between mean free path, phase breaking length and roughness
correlation length. Analysis of the experimental results allows us to estimate
parameters of short- and long-range correlated roughness which have been found
in a good agreement with atomic force microscopy data obtained for just the
same samples.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Exact decoherence to pointer states in free open quantum systems is
  universal
Authors: J. Eisert
Date: 2003-11-05T21:39:09Z
Abstract:   In this paper it is shown that exact decoherence to minimal uncertainty
Gaussian pointer states is generic for free quantum particles coupled to a heat
bath. More specifically, the paper is concerned with damped free particles
linearly coupled under product initial conditions to a heat bath at arbitrary
temperature, with arbitrary coupling strength and spectral densities covering
the Ohmic, subohmic, and supraohmic regime. Then it is true that there exists a
time t_c such that for times t>t_c the state can always be exactly represented
as a mixture (convex combination) of particular minimal uncertainty Gaussian
states, regardless of and independent from the initial state. This exact
`localisation' is hence not a feature specific to high temperatures and weak
damping limit, but is rather a generic property of damped free particles.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Modelling of Optical Detection of Spin-Polarized Carrier Injection into
  Light-Emitting Devices
Authors: M. C. de Oliveira, He Bi Sun
Date: 2003-11-05T20:24:44Z
Abstract:   We investigate the emission of multimodal polarized light from Light Emitting
Devices due to spin-aligned carriers injection. The results are derived through
operator Langevin equations, which include thermal and carrier-injection
fluctuations, as well as non-radiative recombination and electronic g-factor
temperature dependence. We study the dynamics of the optoelectronic processes
and show how the temperature-dependent g-factor and magnetic field affect the
polarization degree of the emitted light. In addition, at high temperatures,
thermal fluctuation reduces the efficiency of the optoelectronic detection
method for measuring spin-polarization degree of carrier injection into
non-magnetic semicondutors.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Functional Complexity Measure for Networks
Authors: Hildegard Meyer-Ortmanns
Date: 2003-11-05T17:51:42Z
Abstract:   We propose a complexity measure which addresses the functional flexibility of
networks. It is conjectured that the functional flexibility is reflected in the
topological diversity of the assigned graphs, resulting from a resolution of
their vertices and a rewiring of their edges under certain constraints. The
application will be a classification of networks in artificial or biological
systems, where functionality plays a central role.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Charge density plateaux and insulating phases in the $t-J$ model with
  ladder geometry
Authors: A. Fledderjohann, A. Langari, K. -H. Muetter
Date: 2003-11-05T15:35:27Z
Abstract:   We discuss the occurrence and the stability of charge density plateaux in
ladder-like $t-J$ systems (at zero magnetization M=0) for the cases of 2- and
3-leg ladders. Starting from isolated rungs at zero leg coupling, we study the
behaviour of plateaux-related phase transitions by means of first order
perturbation theory and compare our results with Lanczos diagonalizations for
$t-J$ ladders ($N=2\times 8$) with increasing leg couplings. Furthermore we
discuss the regimes of rung and leg couplings that should be favoured for the
appearance of the charge density plateaux.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Universality of Entanglement and Quantum Computation Complexity
Authors: Roman Orus, Jose I. Latorre
Date: 2003-11-05T14:53:28Z
Abstract:   We study the universality of scaling of entanglement in Shor's factoring
algorithm and in adiabatic quantum algorithms across a quantum phase transition
for both the NP-complete Exact Cover problem as well as the Grover's problem.
The analytic result for Shor's algorithm shows a linear scaling of the entropy
in terms of the number of qubits, therefore difficulting the possibility of an
efficient classical simulation protocol. A similar result is obtained
numerically for the quantum adiabatic evolution Exact Cover algorithm, which
also shows universality of the quantum phase transition the system evolves
nearby. On the other hand, entanglement in Grover's adiabatic algorithm remains
a bounded quantity even at the critical point. A classification of scaling of
entanglement appears as a natural grading of the computational complexity of
simulating quantum phase transitions.


Category: cond-mat
Title: On-surface and Subsurface Adsorption of Oxygen on Stepped Ag(210) and
  Ag(410) Surfaces
Authors: A. Kokalj, N. Bonini, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Baroni
Date: 2003-11-05T08:16:57Z
Abstract:   The adsorption of atomic oxygen and its inclusion into subsurface sites on
Ag(210) and Ag(410) surfaces have been investigated using density functional
theory. We find that--in the absence of adatoms on the first metal
layer--subsurface adsorption results in strong lattice distortion which makes
it energetically unfavoured. However subsurface sites are significantly
stabilised when a sufficient amount of O adatoms is present on the surface. At
high enough O coverage on the Ag(210) surface the mixed on-surface + subsurface
O adsorption is energetically favoured with respect to the on-surface only
adsorption. Instead, on the Ag(410) surface, at the coverage we have considered
(3/8 ML), the existence of stable terrace sites makes the subsurface O
incorporation less favourable. These findings are compatible with the results
of recent HREEL experiments which have actually motivated this work.


Category: cond-mat
Title: On the Form Factor for the Unitary Group
Authors: Mirko Degli Esposti, Andreas Knauf
Date: 2003-11-04T16:39:31Z
Abstract:   We study the combinatorics of the contributions to the form factor of the
group U(N) in the large $N$ limit. This relates to questions about
semiclassical contributions to the form factor of quantum systems described by
the unitary ensemble.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Low-energy unphysical saddle in polynomial molecular potentials
Authors: Alessio Del Monte, Nicola Manini, Luca G. Molinari, Gian Paolo Brivio
Date: 2003-11-04T14:28:13Z
Abstract:   Vibrational spectra of polyatomic molecules are often obtained from a
polynomial expansion of the adiabatic potential around a minimum. For several
molecules, we show that such an approximation displays an unphysical saddle
point of comparatively small energy, leading to a region where the potential is
negative and unbounded. This poses an upper limit for a reliable evaluation of
vibrational levels. We argue that the presence of such saddle points is
general.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Vacuum-field Rabi oscillations in atomically doped carbon nanotubes
Authors: I. V. Bondarev, G. Ya. Slepyan, S. A. Maksimenko, Ph. Lambin
Date: 2003-11-04T10:43:54Z
Abstract:   We report a strictly non-exponential spontaneous decay dynamics of an excited
two-level atom placed inside or at different distances outside a carbon
nanotube. This is the result of strong non-Markovian memory effects arising
from the rapid frequency variation of the photonic density of states near the
nanotube. The system exhibits vacuum-field Rabi oscillations when the atom is
close enough to the nanotube surface and the atomic transition frequency is in
the vicinity of the resonance of the photonic density of states.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dark Matter-Wave Solitons in Optical Lattices
Authors: Pearl J. Y. Louis, Elena A. Ostrovskaya, Yuri S. Kivshar
Date: 2003-11-04T05:00:18Z
Abstract:   We analyze the Floquet-Bloch matter-wave spectrum of Bose-Einstein
condensates loaded into single-periodic optical lattices and double-periodic
superlattices. In the framework of the Gross-Pitaevskii equation, we describe
the structure and analyze the mobility properties of dark matter-wave solitons
residing on the background of extended nonlinear Bloch-type states. We
demonstrate that interaction between dark solitons can be effectively
controlled in optical superlattices.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Hall effect in cobalt-doped TiO$_{2-δ}$
Authors: J. S. Higgins, S. R. Shinde, S. B. Ogale, T. Venkatesan, R. L. Greene
Date: 2003-11-03T16:43:09Z
Abstract:   We report Hall effect measurements on thin films of cobalt-doped
TiO$_{2-\delta}$. Films with low carrier concentrations (10$^{18}$ - 10$^{19}$)
yield a linear behavior in the Hall data while those having higher carrier
concentrations (10$^{21}$ - 10$^{22}$) display anomalous behavior near zero
field. In the entire range of carrier concentration, n-type conduction is
observed. The appearance of the anomalous behavior is accompanied by a possible
structural change from rutile TiO$_{2}$ to Ti$_[n}$O$_{2n-1}$ Magneli phase(s).


Category: cond-mat
Title: Energy levels in polarization superlattices: a comparison of continuum
  strain models
Authors: B. Jogai, J. D. Albrecht, E. Pan
Date: 2003-11-03T16:28:27Z
Abstract:   A theoretical model for the energy levels in polarization superlattices is
presented. The model includes the effect of strain on the local
polarization-induced electric fields and the subsequent effect on the energy
levels. Two continuum strain models are contrasted. One is the standard strain
model derived from Hooke's law that is typically used to calculate energy
levels in polarization superlattices and quantum wells. The other is a
fully-coupled strain model derived from the thermodynamic equation of state for
piezoelectric materials. The latter is more complete and applicable to strongly
piezoelectric materials where corrections to the standard model are
significant. The underlying theory has been applied to AlGaN/GaN superlattices
and quantum wells. It is found that the fully-coupled strain model yields very
different electric fields from the standard model. The calculated intersubband
transition energies are shifted by approximately 5 -- 19 meV, depending on the
structure. Thus from a device standpoint, the effect of applying the
fully-coupled model produces a very measurable shift in the peak wavelength.
This result has implications for the design of AlGaN/GaN optical switches.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking and roton like excitations in
  gauged sigma-model at finite density
Authors: V. P. Gusynin, V. A. Miransky, I. A. Shovkovy
Date: 2003-11-03T15:16:25Z
Abstract:   The linear $\sigma$-model with a chemical potential for hypercharge is a toy
model for the description of the dynamics of the kaon condensate in high
density QCD. We analyze the dynamics of the gauged version of this model. It is
shown that spontaneous breakdown of $SU(2) \times U(1)_{Y}$ symmetry, caused by
the chemical potential, is always accompanied by spontaneous breakdown of both
rotational symmetry and electromagnetic $U(1)_{em}$. The spectrum of
excitations in this model is rich and, because of rotational symmetry
breakdown, anisotropic. It is shown that there exist excitation branches that
behave as phonon like quasiparticles for small momenta and as roton like ones
for large momenta. This suggests that this model can be relevant for
anisotropic superfluid systems.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Angular distribution of photoluminescence as a probe of Bose
  Condensation of trapped excitons
Authors: Jonathan Keeling, L. S. Levitov, P. B. Littlewood
Date: 2003-11-03T13:10:01Z
Abstract:   Recent experiments on two-dimensional exciton systems have shown the excitons
collect in shallow in-plane traps. We find that Bose condensation in a trap
results in a dramatic change of the exciton photoluminescence (PL) angular
distribution. The long-range coherence of the condensed state gives rise to a
sharply focussed peak of radiation in the direction normal to the plane. By
comparing the PL profile with and without Bose Condensation we provide a simple
diagnostic for the existence of a Bose condensate. The PL peak has strong
temperature dependence due to the thermal order parameter phase fluctuations
across the system. The angular PL distribution can also be used for imaging
vortices in the trapped condensate. Vortex phase spatial variation leads to
destructive interference of PL radiation in certain directions, creating nodes
in the PL distribution that imprint the vortex configuration.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dissipationless Spin Current in Anisotropic p-Doped Semiconductors
Authors: Bogdan A. Bernevig, JiangPing Hu, Eran Mukamel, Shou-Cheng Zhang
Date: 2003-11-03T06:13:54Z
Abstract:   Recently, dissipationless spin current has been predicted for the p-doped
semiconductors with spin-orbit coupling. Here we investigate the effect of
spherical symmetry breaking on the dissipationless spin current, and obtain
values of the intrinsic spin Hall conductivity for realistic semiconductor band
structures with cubic symmetry.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Constructive Methods of Invariant Manifolds for Kinetic Problems
Authors: A. N. Gorban, I. V. Karlin, A. Yu. Zinovyev
Date: 2003-11-02T17:05:32Z
Abstract:   We present the Constructive Methods of Invariant Manifolds for model
reduction in physical and chemical kinetics, developed during last two decades.
The problem of reduced description is studied as a problem of constructing the
slow invariant manifold. The invariance conditions are formulated as the
differential equation for a manifold immersed in the phase space (the
invariance equation). The equation of motion for immersed manifolds is obtained
(the film extension of the dynamics). Invariant manifolds are fixed points for
this equation, and slow invariant manifolds are Lyapunov stable fixed points,
thus slowness is presented as stability. A collection of methods for
construction of slow invariant manifolds is presented, in particular the
analogue of KAM methods for dissipative systems. We systematically consider a
discrete analogue of the slow (stable) positively invariant manifolds for
dissipative systems, invariant grids. The following examples of applications
are presented: Nonperturbative deviation of physically consistent hydrodynamics
from the Boltzmann equation and from the reversible dynamics, for Knudsen
numbers ~ 1; construction of the moment equations for nonequilibrium media and
their dynamical correction (instead of extension of list of variables) to gain
more accuracy in description of highly nonequilibrium flows; invariant grids
for chemical reactions; universal continuous media description of dilute
polymeric solution, etc.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Coherence of trapped one-dimensional (quasi-)condensates and acontinuous
  atom lasers in waveguides
Authors: N. P. Proukakis
Date: 2003-10-31T21:31:14Z
Abstract:   We present a model for a continuous atom laser in a one-dimensional
waveguide. The beam is formed by continuous Raman outcoupling of a trapped
one-dimensional (quasi-)condensate, which is created by imposing a tightly
confining transverse optical potential on a three-dimensional magnetically
trapped ultracold thermal gas. The trapped (quasi-)condensate is modelled by a
stochastic Langevin equation, in which pumping arises naturally from the
surrounding three-dimensional thermal cloud, which acts as its heat bath. When
the outcoupling is turned on, such pumping leads to continuous replenishing of
the (quasi-)condensate, and thus to a steady-state operation for the atom
laser, which is described by a nonlinear Schroedinger equation, coupled to the
Langevin equation for the (quasi-)condensate. This model is used to study the
temporal and spatial evolution of the coherence length of the
(quasi-)condensate and the atom laser over the entire system.


Category: cond-mat
Title: The Casimir Effect and Geometric Optics
Authors: R. L. Jaffe, A. Scardicchio
Date: 2003-10-31T20:24:22Z
Abstract:   We propose a new approach to the Casimir effect based on classical ray
optics. We define and compute the contribution of classical optical paths to
the Casimir force between rigid bodies. We reproduce the standard result for
parallel plates and agree over a wide range of parameters with a recent
numerical treatment of the sphere and plate with Dirichlet boundary conditions.
Our approach improves upon proximity force approximation. It can be generalized
easily to other geometries, other boundary conditions, to the computation of
Casimir energy densities and to many other situations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Traveling wave fronts and the transition to saturation
Authors: S. Munier, R. Peschanski
Date: 2003-10-31T15:31:38Z
Abstract:   We propose a general method to study the solutions to nonlinear QCD evolution
equations, based on a deep analogy with the physics of traveling waves. In
particular, we show that the transition to the saturation regime of high energy
QCD is identical to the formation of the front of a traveling wave. Within this
physical picture, we provide the expressions for the saturation scale and the
gluon density profile as a function of the total rapidity and the transverse
momentum. The application to the Balitsky-Kovchegov equation for both fixed and
running coupling constants confirms the effectiveness of this method.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamical instability of a dark soliton in a quasi-one-dimensional
  Bose-Einstein condensate perturbed by an optical lattice
Authors: N. G. Parker, N. P. Proukakis, C. F. Barenghi, C. S. Adams
Date: 2003-10-31T09:56:24Z
Abstract:   The motion of a dark soliton is investigated in a one-dimensional dilute
Bose-Einstein condensate confined in a harmonic trap and an optical lattice.
The harmonic trap induces a dynamical instability of the soliton, culminating
in sound emission. The presence of the optical lattice enhances the
instability, and in addition, dephases the emitted sound waves, thus preventing
stabilisation of the soliton by sound reabsorption. This instability can be
probed experimentally by monitoring the soliton oscillations under various
lattice configurations, which can be realised by changing the intensity and
angle between the laser beams that form the lattice. For short enough times,
such that the emitted sound does not reinteract with the soliton, the power
emitted by the soliton is found to be proportional to the square of the local
soliton acceleration, which is in turn proportional to the deformation of the
soliton profile.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Unconventional magnetism in all-carbon nanofoam
Authors: A. V. Rode, E. G. Gamaly, A. G. Christy, J. G. Fitz Gerald, S. T. Hyde, R. G. Elliman, B. Luther-Davies, A. I. Veinger, J. Androulakis, J. Giapintzakis
Date: 2003-10-31T04:01:30Z
Abstract:   We report production of nanostructured carbon foam by a high-repetition-rate,
high-power laser ablation of glassy carbon in Ar atmosphere. A combination of
characterization techniques revealed that the system contains both sp2 and sp3
bonded carbon atoms. The material is a novel form of carbon in which
graphite-like sheets fill space at very low density due to strong hyperbolic
curvature, as proposed for ?schwarzite?. The foam exhibits ferromagnetic-like
behaviour up to 90 K, with a narrow hysteresis curve and a high saturation
magnetization. Such magnetic properties are very unusual for a carbon
allotrope. Detailed analysis excludes impurities as the origin of the magnetic
signal. We postulate that localized unpaired spins occur because of topological
and bonding defects associated with the sheet curvature, and that these spins
are stabilized due to the steric protection offered by the convoluted sheets.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Quantum Monte Carlo study of quasi-one-dimensional Bose gases
Authors: G. E. Astrakharchik, D. Blume, S. Giorgini, B. E. Granger
Date: 2003-10-31T00:40:13Z
Abstract:   We study the behavior of quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1d) Bose gases by Monte
Carlo techniques, i.e., by the variational Monte Carlo, the diffusion Monte
Carlo, and the fixed-node diffusion Monte Carlo technique. Our calculations
confirm and extend our results of an earlier study [Astrakharchik et al.,
cond-mat/0308585]. We find that a quasi-1d Bose gas i) is well described by a
1d model Hamiltonian with contact interactions and renormalized coupling
constant; ii) reaches the Tonks-Girardeau regime for a critical value of the 3d
scattering length a_3d; iii) enters a unitary regime for |a_3d| -> infinity,
where the properties of the gas are independent of a_3d and are similar to
those of a 1d gas of hard-rods; and iv) becomes unstable against cluster
formation for a critical value of the 1d gas parameter. The accuracy and
implications of our results are discussed in detail.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Dynamics of entanglement between two atomic samples with spontaneous
  scattering
Authors: Antonio Di Lisi, Silvio De Siena, Fabrizio Illuminati
Date: 2003-10-30T18:16:05Z
Abstract:   We investigate the effects of spontaneous scattering on the evolution of
entanglement of two atomic samples, probed by phase shift measurements on
optical beams interacting with both samples. We develop a formalism of
conditional quantum evolutions and present a wave function analysis implemented
in numerical simulations of the state vector dynamics. This method allows to
track the evolution of entanglement and to compare it with the predictions
obtained when spontaneous scattering is neglected. We provide numerical
evidence that the interferometric scheme to entangle atomic samples is only
marginally affected by the presence of spontaneous scattering, and should thus
be robust even in more realistic situations.


Category: cond-mat
Title: On the Real Spectra of Calogero Model with Complex Coupling
Authors: Pijush K. Ghosh, Kumar S. Gupta
Date: 2003-10-30T08:59:52Z
Abstract:   We study the eigenvalue problem of the rational Calogero model with the
coupling of the inverse-square interaction as a complex number. We show that
although this model is manifestly non-invariant under the combined parity and
time-reversal symmetry ${\cal{PT}}$, the eigenstates corresponding to the zero
value of the generalized angular momentum have real energies.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Modeling of realistic cladding structures for air-core photonic band-gap
  fibers
Authors: Niels Asger Mortensen, Martin Dybendal Nielsen
Date: 2003-10-30T07:46:35Z
Abstract:   Cladding structures of photonic band-gap fibers often have air-holes of
non-circular shape and, typically, close-to-hexagonal air holes with curved
corners are observed. We study photonic band-gaps in such structures by aid of
a two-parameter representation of the size and curvature. For the fundamental
band-gap we find that the band-gap edges (the intersections with the air line)
shift toward shorter wavelengths when the air-filling fraction f is increased.
The band-gap also broadens and the relative band-width increases exponentially
with f^2. Comparing to recent experiments [Nature 424, 657 (2003)] we find very
good agreement.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Factorization of Correlation Functions and the Replica Limit of the Toda
  Lattice Equation
Authors: K. Splittorff, J. J. M. Verbaarschot
Date: 2003-10-29T19:52:27Z
Abstract:   Exact microscopic spectral correlation functions are derived by means of the
replica limit of the Toda lattice equation. We consider both Hermitian and
non-Hermitian theories in the Wigner-Dyson universality class (class A) and in
the chiral universality class (class AIII). In the Hermitian case we rederive
two-point correlation functions for class A and class AIII as well as several
one-point correlation functions in class AIII. In the non-Hermitian case the
spectral density of non-Hermitian complex random matrices in the weak
non-Hermiticity limit is obtained directly from the replica limit of the Toda
lattice equation. In the case of class A, this result describes the spectral
density of a disordered system in a constant imaginary vector potential (the
Hatano-Nelson model) which is known from earlier work. New results are obtained
for the spectral density in the weak non-Hermiticity limit of a quenched chiral
random matrix model at nonzero chemical potential. These results apply to the
ergodic or $\epsilon$ domain of quenched QCD at nonzero chemical potential. The
spectral density obtained is different from the result derived by Akemann for a
closely related model, which is given by the leading order asymptotic expansion
of our result. In all cases, the replica limit of the Toda lattice equation
explains the factorization of spectral one- and two-point functions into a
product of a bosonic (noncompact integral) and a fermionic (compact integral)
partition function. We conclude that the fermionic, the bosonic and the
supersymmetric partition functions are all part of a single integrable
hierarchy. This is the reason that it is possible to obtain the supersymmetric
partition function, and its derivatives, from the replica limit of the Toda
lattice equation.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Self-consistent fragmented excited states of trapped condensates
Authors: L. S. Cederbaum, A. I. Streltsov
Date: 2003-10-29T15:25:01Z
Abstract:   Self-consistent excited states of condensates are solutions of the
Gross-Pitaevskii (GP) equation and have been amply discussed in the literature
and related to experiments. By introducing a more general mean-field which
includes the GP one as a special case, we find a new class of self-consistent
excited states. In these states macroscopic numbers of bosons reside in
different one-particle functions, i.e., the states are fragmented. Still, a
single chemical potential is associated with the condensate. A numerical
example is presented, illustrating that the energies of the new, fragmented,
states are much lower than those of the GP excited states, and that they are
stable to variations of the particle number and shape of the trap potential.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Entanglement production by quantum error correction in the presence of
  correlated environment
Authors: G. De Chiara, R. Fazio, C. Macchiavello, G. M. Palma
Date: 2003-10-29T15:24:42Z
Abstract:   We analyze the effect of a quantum error correcting code on the entanglement
of encoded logical qubits in the presence of a dephasing interaction with a
correlated environment. Such correlated reservoir introduces entanglement
between physical qubits. We show that for short times the quantum error
correction interprets such entanglement as errors and suppresses it. However
for longer time, although quantum error correction is no longer able to correct
errors, it enhances the rate of entanglement production due to the interaction
with the environment.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Best mean-field for condensates
Authors: L. S. Cederbaum, A. I. Streltsov
Date: 2003-10-29T15:12:30Z
Abstract:   The Gross-Pitaevskii equation assumes that all (identical) bosons of a
condensate reside in a single one-particle function. Here, we raise the
question whether it always provides the best mean-field ansatz for condensates,
leading to the lowest mean-field ground state energy. To this end, we derive a
mean-field approach allowing for bosons to reside in several different
one-particle functions. The number of bosons in each of these functions is a
variational parameter minimizing the energy. The energy and one-particle
functions at these optimal numbers can be determined directly. A numerical
example is presented demonstrating that the mean-field energy of trapped bosons
can be below that provided by the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. Implications are
discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Imaging of spinor gases
Authors: Iacopo Carusotto, Erich J. Mueller
Date: 2003-10-29T10:28:48Z
Abstract:   We explore the dielectric properties of spinor condensates. Gases with vector
(nematic) order, such as spin-1 condensates with ferromagnetic
(antiferromagnetic) interactions, display optical activity (birefringence).
This optical activity/birefringence is respectively seen for light detuned from
resonance by a frequency which is not too large compared with the
fine/hyperfine structure. Careful tuning of the light frequency can isolate
either of these two effects. These features can be used to image spin textures
in clouds of spin 1 bosons, and to discern states showing different types of
spin order.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Correlations between pressure and bandwidth effects in metal-insulator
  transitions in manganites
Authors: Congwu Cui, Trevor A. Tyson
Date: 2003-10-29T04:19:21Z
Abstract:   The effect of pressure on the metal-insulator transition in manganites with a
broad range of bandwidths is investigated. A critical pressure is found at
which the metal-insulator transition temperature, T$_{MI}$, reaches a maximum
value in every sample studied. The origin of this universal pressure and the
relation between the pressure effect and the bandwidth on the metal-insulator
transition are discussed.


Category: cond-mat
Title: All-electron self-consistent GW approximation: Application to Si, MnO,
  and NiO
Authors: Sergey V. Faleev, Mark van Schilfgaarde, Takao Kotani
Date: 2003-10-29T01:56:38Z
Abstract:   We present a new kind self-consistent GW approximation (scGW) based on the
all-electron, full-potential LMTO method. By iterating the eigenfunctions of
the GW Hamiltonian, self-consistency in both the charge density and the
quasiparticle spectrum is achieved. We explain why this form of
self-consistency should be preferred to the conventional one. Then some results
for Si are shown as a representative semiconductor, to establish agreement with
a prior scGW calculation. Finally we consider many details in the electronic
structure of the antiferromagnetic insulators MnO and NiO. Excellent agreement
with experiment is shown for many properties, suggesting that a Landau
quasiparticle (energy band) picture of MnO and NiO provides a reasonable
description of electronic structure even in these correlated materials.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Phonon and plasmon excitation in inelastic electron tunneling
  spectroscopy of graphite
Authors: L. Vitali, M. A. Schneider, K. Kern, L. Wirtz, A. Rubio
Date: 2003-10-28T18:11:34Z
Abstract:   The inelastic electron tunneling spectrum (IETS)of highly oriented pyrolitic
graphite (HOPG) has been measured with scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) at
6K. The observed spectral features are in very good agreement with the
vibrational density of states (vDOS) of graphite calculated from first
principles. We discuss the enhancement of certain phonon modes by
phonon-assisted tunneling in STS based on the restrictions imposed by the
electronic structure of graphite. We also demonstrate for the first time the
local excitation of surface-plasmons in IETS which are detected at an energy of
40 meV.


Category: cond-mat
Title: Flow instabilities in complex fluids: Nonlinear rheology and slow
  relaxations
Authors: A. Aradian, M. E. Cates
Date: 2003-10-28T15:58:22Z
Abstract:   We here present two simplified models aimed at describing the long-term,
irregular behaviours observed in the rheological response of certain complex
fluids, such as periodic oscillations or chaotic-like variations. Both models
exploit the idea of having a (non-linear) rheological equation, controlling the
temporal evolution of the stress, where one of the participating variables (a
"structural" variable) is subject to a distinct dynamics with a different
relaxation time. The coupling between the two dynamics is a source of
instability.


