Category: quant-ph
Title: The Convexity Condition of Density-Functional Theory
Authors: Andrew C. Burgess, Edward Linscott, David D. O'Regan
Date: 2023-09-29T17:54:43Z
Abstract:   Based on experimental evidence, it has long been postulated that the total
energy of a finite electronic system is convex with respect to electron count,
so that 2 E_v[N_0] <= E_v[N_0 - 1] + E_v[N_0 + 1]. Using the
infinite-separation-limit technique, this Communication proves the convexity
condition for any formulation of density-functional theory (DFT) that is (1)
exact for all v-representable densities, (2) size-consistent, and (3)
translationally invariant. A corollary to this proof shows that in such
formulations of DFT, the electron affinity of a finite electronic system is
always less than or equal to its ionization potential. An analogous result is
also proven for one-body reduced density matrix functional theory. This proof
offers a stringent constraint on the exact exchange-correlation functional that
could aid in the development of density functional approximations. It also
lifts a standing assumption in the proof of the piecewise linearity condition
with respect to electron count, which has proven central to understanding the
Kohn-Sham band-gap and the exchange-correlation derivative discontinuity of
DFT.


Category: hep-th
Title: Physics with non-unital algebras? An invitation to the Okubo algebra
Authors: Alessio Marrani, Daniele Corradetti, Francesco Zucconi
Date: 2023-09-29T17:47:49Z
Abstract:   This paper discusses the potential application of the Okubonions, i.e. the
Okubo algebra $\mathcal{O}$, within quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The Okubo
algebra lacks a unit element and sits in the adjoint representation of its
automorphism group $\text{SU}(3)_{\mathcal{O}}$, being fundamentally different
from the better-known octonions $\mathbb{O}$. A physical interpretation is
proposed in which the Okubonions represent gluons, the gauge bosons of QCD
$\text{SU}(3)$ color symmetry, while the octonions represent quarks (and color
singlets). However, it is shown that the respective $\text{SU}(3)$ symmetries
for Okubonions and octonions are distinct and inequivalent subgroups of
$\text{Spin}(8)$ that share no common $\text{SU}(2)$ subgroup. The unusual
properties of Okubonions are suggested as a possible source for peculiar QCD
phenomena like asymptotic freedom and color confinement, though actual
mechanisms remain to be investigated.


Category: hep-th
Title: Spinning waveforms from KMOC at leading order
Authors: Stefano De Angelis, Riccardo Gonzo, Pavel P. Novichkov
Date: 2023-09-29T17:41:24Z
Abstract:   We provide the analytic waveform in time domain for the scattering of two
Kerr black holes at leading order in the post-Minkowskian expansion and up to
fourth order in both spins. The result is obtained by the generalization of the
KMOC formalism to radiative observables, combined with the analytic
continuation of the five-point scattering amplitude to complex kinematics. We
use analyticity arguments to express the waveform directly in terms of the
three-point coupling of the graviton to the spinning particles and the
gravitational Compton amplitudes, completely bypassing the need to compute and
integrate the five-point amplitude. In particular, this allows to easily
include higher-order spin contributions for any spinning compact body. Finally,
in the spinless case we find a new compact and gauge-invariant representation
of the Kovacs-Thorne waveform.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Momentum-space imaging of ultra-thin electron liquids in delta-doped
  silicon
Authors: Procopios Constantinou, Taylor J. Z. Stock, Eleanor Crane, Alexander Kölker, Marcel van Loon, Juerong Li, Sarah Fearn, Henric Bornemann, Nicolò D'Anna, Andrew J. Fisher, Vladimir N. Strocov, Gabriel Aeppli, Neil J. Curson, Steven R. Schofield
Date: 2023-09-29T17:18:57Z
Abstract:   Two-dimensional dopant layers ($\delta$-layers) in semiconductors provide the
high-mobility electron liquids (2DELs) needed for nanoscale quantum-electronic
devices. Key parameters such as carrier densities, effective masses, and
confinement thicknesses for 2DELs have traditionally been extracted from
quantum magnetotransport. In principle, the parameters are immediately readable
from the one-electron spectral function that can be measured by angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Here, buried 2DEL $\delta$-layers in
silicon are measured with soft X-ray (SX) ARPES to obtain detailed information
about their filled conduction bands and extract device-relevant properties.
This study takes advantage of the larger probing depth and photon energy range
of SX-ARPES relative to vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) ARPES to accurately measure
the $\delta$-layer electronic confinement. The measurements are made on
ambient-exposed samples and yield extremely thin ($\approx 1$ $nm$) and dense
($\approx$ $10^{14}$ $cm^2$) 2DELs. Critically, this method is used to show
that $\delta$-layers of arsenic exhibit better electronic confinement than
$\delta$-layers of phosphorus fabricated under identical conditions.


Category: hep-th
Title: Thermodynamics with conformal Killing vector in the charged Vaidya
  metric
Authors: Seoktae Koh, Miok Park, Abbas M. Sherif
Date: 2023-09-29T17:00:13Z
Abstract:   We investigate the charged Vaidya spacetime with conformal symmetry by
classifying the horizons and finding its connection to Hawking temperature. We
find a conformal Killing vector whose existence requires the mass and electric
charge functions to be proportional, as well as linear in time. Solving the
Killing equations for the conformally transformed metric from the linear
charged Vaidya metric yields the required form of the conformal factor. From
the vanishing of the norm of the conformal Killing vector, we find three
conformal Killing horizons which, under the transformation, are mapped to the
Killing horizons of the associated static spacetime, if the spherical symmetry
is maintained. We find that the conformal factor is not uniquely determined,
but can take any function of the ratio of the radial coordinate to the
dynamical mass. As an example, we illustrate a static spacetime with our choice
of the conformal factor and explicitly show that the surface gravity of the
conformal Killing horizons, which is conformally invariant, yield the expected
Hawking temperature in the static spacetime. This static black hole spacetime
contains a cosmological horizon, but it is not asymptotically de Sitter. We
also investigate the case when the mass parameter is equal to the constant
electric charge. While in this case the standard pair of horizons, the loci of
the time component of the metric, degenerate, the conformal Killing horizons do
not degenerate. This therefore leads to a non-zero Hawking temperature in the
associated static spacetime.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Topological interfaces crossed by defects and textures of continuous and
  discrete point group symmetries in spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: Giuseppe Baio, Matthew T. Wheeler, David S. Hall, Janne Ruostekoski, Magnus O. Borgh
Date: 2023-09-29T16:56:41Z
Abstract:   We systematically and analytically construct a set of spinor wave functions
representing defects and textures that continuously penetrate interfaces
between coexisting, topologically distinct magnetic phases in a spin-2
Bose-Einstein condensate. These include singular and nonsingular vortices
carrying mass or spin circulation that connect across interfaces between
biaxial- and uniaxial nematic, cyclic and ferromagnetic phases, as well as
vortices terminating as monopoles on the interface ("boojums"). The
biaxial-nematic and cyclic phases exhibit discrete polytope symmetries
featuring non-Abelian vortices and we investigate a pair of non-commuting line
defects within the context of a topological interface. By numerical
simulations, we characterize the emergence of non-trivial defect core
structures, including the formation of composite defects. Our results
demonstrate the potential of spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates as experimentally
accessible platforms for exploring interface physics, offering a wealth of
combinations of continuous and discrete symmetries.


Category: hep-th
Title: Topological interfaces crossed by defects and textures of continuous and
  discrete point group symmetries in spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates
Authors: Giuseppe Baio, Matthew T. Wheeler, David S. Hall, Janne Ruostekoski, Magnus O. Borgh
Date: 2023-09-29T16:56:41Z
Abstract:   We systematically and analytically construct a set of spinor wave functions
representing defects and textures that continuously penetrate interfaces
between coexisting, topologically distinct magnetic phases in a spin-2
Bose-Einstein condensate. These include singular and nonsingular vortices
carrying mass or spin circulation that connect across interfaces between
biaxial- and uniaxial nematic, cyclic and ferromagnetic phases, as well as
vortices terminating as monopoles on the interface ("boojums"). The
biaxial-nematic and cyclic phases exhibit discrete polytope symmetries
featuring non-Abelian vortices and we investigate a pair of non-commuting line
defects within the context of a topological interface. By numerical
simulations, we characterize the emergence of non-trivial defect core
structures, including the formation of composite defects. Our results
demonstrate the potential of spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates as experimentally
accessible platforms for exploring interface physics, offering a wealth of
combinations of continuous and discrete symmetries.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Singular value decomposition quantum algorithm for quantum biology
Authors: Emily K. Oh, Timothy J. Krogmeier, Anthony W. Schlimgen, Kade Head-Marsden
Date: 2023-09-29T16:52:10Z
Abstract:   There has been a recent interest in quantum algorithms for the modelling and
prediction of non-unitary quantum dynamics using current quantum computers. The
field of quantum biology is one area where these algorithms could prove to be
useful, as biological systems are generally intractable to treat in their
complete form, but amenable to an open quantum systems approach. Here we
present the application of a recently developed singular value decomposition
algorithm to two well-studied benchmark systems in quantum biology: excitonic
energy transport through the Fenna-Matthews-Olson complex and the radical pair
mechanism for avian navigation. We demonstrate that the singular value
decomposition algorithm is capable of capturing accurate short- and long-time
dynamics for these systems through implementation on a quantum simulator, and
conclude that this algorithm has the potential to be an effective tool for the
future study of systems relevant to quantum biology.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Quantum Superposition, Collapse of Wave Function, Quantum Measurement
  and Nonadiabatic Dressed States
Authors: I. G. Koprinkov
Date: 2023-09-29T16:27:50Z
Abstract:   Quantum superposition, collapse of wave function and quantum measurement
problem are reexamined based on nonadiabatic dressed states and experimental
observations on the quantum transitions. The physical mechanisms behind these
processes are revealed.


Category: hep-th
Title: Introduction to noncommutative field and gauge theory
Authors: Patrizia Vitale, Martina Adamo, Roukaya Dekhil, Diego Fernández-Silvestre
Date: 2023-09-29T16:17:50Z
Abstract:   These are lecture notes for an introductory course on noncommutative field
and gauge theory. We begin by reviewing quantum mechanics as the prototypical
noncommutative theory, as well as the geometrical language of standard gauge
theory. Then, we review a specific approach to noncommutative field and gauge
theory, which relies on the introduction of a derivations-based differential
calculus. We focus on the cases of constant and linear noncommutativity, e.g.,
the Moyal spacetime and the so-called $\mathbb{R}^3_\lambda$, respectively. In
particular, we review the $g\varphi^4$ scalar field theory and the $U(1)$ gauge
theory on such noncommutative spaces. Finally, we discuss noncommutative
spacetime symmetries from both the observer and particle point of view. In this
context, the twist approach is reviewed and the $\lambda$-Minkowski
$g\varphi^4$ model is discussed.


Category: quant-ph
Title: Machine Learning for Practical Quantum Error Mitigation
Authors: Haoran Liao, Derek S. Wang, Iskandar Sitdikov, Ciro Salcedo, Alireza Seif, Zlatko K. Minev
Date: 2023-09-29T16:17:12Z
Abstract:   Quantum computers are actively competing to surpass classical supercomputers,
but quantum errors remain their chief obstacle. The key to overcoming these on
near-term devices has emerged through the field of quantum error mitigation,
enabling improved accuracy at the cost of additional runtime. In practice,
however, the success of mitigation is limited by a generally exponential
overhead. Can classical machine learning address this challenge on today's
quantum computers? Here, through both simulations and experiments on
state-of-the-art quantum computers using up to 100 qubits, we demonstrate that
machine learning for quantum error mitigation (ML-QEM) can drastically reduce
overheads, maintain or even surpass the accuracy of conventional methods, and
yield near noise-free results for quantum algorithms. We benchmark a variety of
machine learning models -- linear regression, random forests, multi-layer
perceptrons, and graph neural networks -- on diverse classes of quantum
circuits, over increasingly complex device-noise profiles, under interpolation
and extrapolation, and for small and large quantum circuits. These tests employ
the popular digital zero-noise extrapolation method as an added reference. We
further show how to scale ML-QEM to classically intractable quantum circuits by
mimicking the results of traditional mitigation results, while significantly
reducing overhead. Our results highlight the potential of classical machine
learning for practical quantum computation.